https://www.techradar.com/news
How to watch Ireland v Scotland online: 6 nations rugby live stream
How to watch Ireland v Scotland Today's match kicks off at 2.15pm, with live coverage on ITV1 from 1.30pm, as well as the ITV Hub.

This weekend's 6 Nations rugby kicks off today as Ireland take on Scotland in Dublin.

Both sides will be looking to continue from excellent performances last time out as the fight for the title hots up.

The hosts, who are unbeaten so far and looking to complete a grand slam, welcome back Garry Ringrose and Tadhg Furlong as they look to preserve that excellent run in front of a packed home crowd.

However Scotland, who resoundingly beat England in the Calcutta Cup in their last game, will be keen to push on and stake their claim for the title. Gregor Townsend makes only one change to that side, with Blair Kinghorn making his international debut on the wing in place of the injured Tommy Seymour.

If you've not managed to get tickets for the big game, and can't get to a TV, here is TechRadar's guide to watching all the 6 Nations rugby action, including Ireland v Scotland online, wherever you are in the world.

(Image: © 6 nations.com)

1. How to watch Ireland v Scotland 6 nations rugby online

This is the best way to watch Ireland v Scotland 6 nations online - from absolutely anywhere in the world - without any commercial breaks:

1. Download and install a VPN

If you don't have easy access (and you don't live in the UK) to watch the 6 nations rugby online in your country, the best way to watch it for free is to download and install a VPN . We've tested all of the major VPN services and we rate ExpressVPN as the absolute best. It's compatible with all of your devices, supports most streaming services and ranks amongst the fastest. You can even install it on devices like an Amazon Fire TV Stick, Apple TV, Xbox and PlayStation. So for a one-stop shop, you can't go wrong with Express - but there are more fantastic VPN options out there as well:

2. Connect to the appropriate server location

Simply open the VPN app, hit 'choose location' and select the appropriate location - it doesn't matter which one and it's super easy to do. Choose UK if you want to watch it on TVPlayer (use the link below)

3. Go to TVPlayer.com

TVPlayer is a free, legal, online streaming service based in the UK which offers hundreds of channels - and you don't even need to sign in to watch without commercial breaks. You will need to do a fair bit of channel hopping though and a lot of the events won't be available on free channels. Continue scrolling if you want to experience a fuller and richer version of the 6 nations.

Where can I watch the 6 nations rugby using a VPN? A VPN will enable you to watch the 6 nations rugby from literally anywhere. So that obviously includes: US, UK, Israel, Belgium, Canada, Germany, Denmark, India, Netherlands, Spain, Brazil, Belgium, Romania, Mexico, France, Sweden, Italy, Portugal, Czech Republic, Ireland, Poland, Kenya, Hungary, South Africa, Indonesia, China, Nigeria, Bangladesh, Russia, Japan, Egypt and more!

(Image: © 6 nations rugby)

2. How to watch the 6 nations rugby in the UK in its entirety:

If you’re in the UK and if you have a TV licence, then ITV Hub is the way to go. You will need to sign up for free in order to watch it though but it is a doddle and once you do it, you can enjoy it almost anywhere: on your mobile, your media player, tablet, your web browser, streaming device, gaming console, TV, cable and satellite operators etc.

3. How to watch Ireland v Scotland 6 nations rugby in the US in its entirety:

As mentioned above, if you're not based in the UK and want to watch the 6 nations rugby live, you won't be able to access the ITV live coverage without using a VPN.

In the US, NBC’s Sports Gold subscription streaming service will be showing all of 2018 6 nations tournament live. The channel's Rugby Pass costs $59.99, but also includes a whole heap of other rugby action, including Premiership Rugby and the 7s World Cup.

Stay safe during the 6 nations rugby

Photos courtesy of SixNationsRugby.com