https://www.usatoday.com/tech/
2018 NCAA tournament: ACC, with nine teams in, has bragging rights for now
CLOSE SportsPulse: Trysta Krick runs through surprises, snubs and other highlights from Selection Sunday as March Madness officially begins. USA TODAY Sports

Kyle Guy and the Virginia Cavaliers celebrate their ACC title. (Photo: Brad Penner, USA TODAY Sports)

Conference bragging rights for the NCAA tournament — at least after the bracket reveal Sunday and before any games are played — belong once again to the Atlantic Coast Conference.

Led by No. 1 overall seed Virginia and No. 2 seeds Duke and North Carolina, the ACC placed nine teams in the tournament, matching the record it set last season.

Hot on its heels, however, is the Southeastern Conference.

The conference best known for cranking out national champions in football landed a league-record eight teams in the tournament, easily topping its record of six, accomplished nine times before (most recently in 2008).

THE BRACKET: Print it out and play along

ANALYSIS:East Region | South Region | Midwest Region | West Region

MORE: Selection committee gave credit for November wins

The Big East got six teams in but leads the way with two No. 1s, Villanova and Xavier.

The rugged Big 12 thought the league would get nine teams in as well but wound up with seven with Baylor among the first four teams out. Oklahoma State also missed out — despite two wins vs. No. 1 seed Kansas — after losing to the Jayhawks in the Big 12 Tournament.

For the Pac-12 Sunday brought another disappointment: Only three teams are in the field — matching American Athletic Conference and the Atlantic 10 — and two of them, UCLA and Arizona State, are in the First Four. Arizona is the 4 seed in the South.

This end-of-winter frustration follows up on a less-than-outstanding fall for "the conference of champions" in the big sports: No College Football Playoff team and a 1-8 bowl record. Spring is right around the corner, Pac-12.

In the end, of course, bragging rights go not to the league with the most teams but to the league with the one team left standing.