https://www.usatoday.com/tech/
NCAA tournament bracket: Selection committee gave credit for November wins
CLOSE SportsPulse: Trysta Krick runs through surprises, snubs and other highlights from Selection Sunday as March Madness officially begins. USA TODAY Sports

Oklahoma guard Trae Young shoots against Baylor. (Photo: Raymond Carlin III, USA TODAY Sports)

Are you ready for some upsets?

I’m not talking about 12 vs. 5, or even 13 vs. 4. I’m talking 16 vs. 1 and 15 vs. 2.

There have been no great teams in college basketball this year, and as the bracket reveal showed us Sunday afternoon, there are no clear-cut favorites to reach San Antonio. If you’ve ever wanted to pick all double-digit seeds to the Final Four, this is the year to do it. After a wacky regular season, anything seems possible this month. The nickname March Madness has never been so appropriate.

And yet, when it came to the bracket reveal, it made … some sense.

THE BRACKET: See all the NCAA tournament matchups | Printable

REGION CAPSULES: East | Midwest | South | West

BIGGEST SNUBS: Seven teams that had strong case to make NCAA field

COMMITTEE MISTAKES: Five teams that were either underseeded or overseeded

The only consensus: That selection show format was disastrous. The sound wasn’t synced, they forgot to turn some lights on and reading a list of automatic qualifiers was borderline insulting. On the plus side, everyone on Twitter seemed to have fun roasting TBS for its production decisions.

At large bids are always the hot topic, and the Selection Committee surprised everyone by putting Syracuse in, and leaving out Southern California. The Trojans, who finished second in the Pac-12 in the regular season and as runner-up at the conference tournament, were ranked No. 34 in the RPI. They are the highest-ranked RPI team to be left out in the 68-team era. Meanwhile Arizona State, which finished ninth (!) in the Pac-12, did get in.

Another disappointing snub: Middle Tennessee, which was set to be a popular Cinderella pick. Also everyone on the committee knows Oklahoma State beat Kansas twice, right?

To the selection committee’s credit, it was true to its word from earlier this season: wins in November mattered as much as wins in March. Oklahoma and Trae Young, which turned a lot of heads in 2017 but have sputtered since the New Year, got in with ease. The Sun Devils were rewarded for a tough non-conference schedule that featured wins at Kansas, and over Xavier.

Speaking of top seeds, is Virginia really the overall No. 1? The Cavaliers, which won the ACC regular season and conference tournament, got a much tougher path than Villanova. UVA will have to go through Cincinnati and Tennessee—plus Arizona and monster Deandre Ayton—to get Tony Bennett to his first Final Four.

With no dominant team in the west—Arizona and Gonzaga were both given four seeds—someone had to be shipped out to Los Angeles. Xavier, which lost in semifinals of the Big East conference tournament, is the right choice there. Kansas was also rewarded with a one seed, though going through Duke or Michigan State doesn’t seem like a prize for anyone.

The biggest conspiracy theory that you’ll read about the next few days: Was the selection committee punishing teams involved in the FBI scandal? Louisville, Southern California and Oklahoma State were left out, and Arizona got a No. 4 seed even after a dominant performance in the Pac-12 tournament. The scandal that rocked the sport before the season just won't go away.

We could spend all month debating the decisions of who's in, who's out and where they're going. The bottom line is that the best time of year is here, and it’s set to be be crazier than ever. Get your brackets—and your double-digit seeds—ready to go. Games tip Tuesday.

IMAGES FROM THE WEEK IN COLLEGE BASKETBALL