https://www.usatoday.com/tech/
New format for NCAA tournament selection show draws criticism
CLOSE SportsPulse: Trysta Krick runs through surprises, snubs and other highlights from Selection Sunday as March Madness officially begins. USA TODAY Sports

Charles Barkley's analysis and jokes with fellow TBS analysts were a bright spot in an otherwise heavily-criticized show. (Photo: Christopher Hanewinckel, USA TODAY Sports)

The tweaks to Sunday’s NCAA March Madness Selection Show were announced last week, but they were either a shock or just not well received by many viewers.

Harold Bryant, executive producer and senior vice president of production at CBS, told USA TODAY Sports on Tuesday that the 68 teams involved in March Madness would be introduced within the first 15 minutes of the show. And, in alphabetical order, the teams were introduced by 6:13 pm ET, just under the estimate.

THE BRACKET: See all the NCAA tournament matchups | Printable

REGION CAPSULES: East | Midwest | South | West

BIGGEST SNUBS: Seven teams that had strong case to make NCAA field

COMMITTEE MISTAKES: Five teams that were either underseeded or overseeded

BRACKET ANALYSIS: Selection committee valued early wins, not late failures

Granted, it didn’t follow the same format it had for years – in which the teams were announced as the brackets were rolled out -– and that created some outcry on social media.

This new #SELECTIONSUNDAY show is painful. Shoulda just listed the bracket. This alphabetical stuff is nonsense. — bluestars07 (@bluestars07) March 11, 2018

Wow. This Selection Show might be the greatest example of “if it isn’t broke, don’t fix it” in the history of Earth.#SelectionSunday — Matt Elliott (@MonarchosMatt) March 11, 2018

Please do not call 911 to complain about the format of the NCAA tournament selection show. We can’t do anything about it, no matter how bad it is. — Lawrence Police (@LawrenceKS_PD) March 11, 2018

Unless you were hiding under a rock this week as teams clinched automatic berths by winning their conference tournament titles, the first 15 minutes of the show was potentially old news. But the exclusion of teams like the University of Southern Cal – which held a news conference shortly after its snub – did give bubble teams some closure early.

If you were hoping your team had secured a No. 1 seed, it wasn't until after the first commercial break that those were revealed. The four No. 1 seeds – Virginia, Villanova, Xavier and Kansas – weren't officially unveiled until shortly after the 68 teams were read off.

The brackets then began to trickle out over the next several minutes and were fully rolled out about 40 minutes into the show, about the same time span as last year and nearly half the time as in 2016 when CBS trickled the brackets out.

But since all the teams that made it already were announced, the bracket rollout lacked the usual celebratory and dejection footage for the bubble teams. Craig Barry, executive vice president and chief content officer, said that was "a small price to pay for doing what's best for the viewer."

Apparently, viewers had become accustomed to the drama when the show had been broadcast on CBS the previous 36 years.

Good gawd, this new #SelectionSunday format is a nightmare.



Completing killing the drama that used to make the show special and one of top TV events of the year.#MarchMadness@TBSNetwork — Jason Ludlow (@JasonMLudlow) March 11, 2018

This new #SelectionSunday show is garbage. Audio is way off and there is zero drama. — Steve Butt (@nflskins12) March 11, 2018

The selection show, like the broadcast coverage of the tournament, is produced as part of a partnership between CBS Sports and Turner Sports. Some audio and video hiccups – including in the audio in the show opener – marred parts of the two-hour show, which was hosted by Ernie Johnson and Greg Gumbel with Charles Barkley, Seth Davis, Clark Kellogg and Kenny Smith serving as analysts from Turner Sports' set in Atlanta.

The inclusion of a studio audience was, at times, an awkward addition to the show. Members of the audience were served pizzas courtesy of sponsor Pizza Hut, but when Johnson asked for a slice and forced the crowd to react, it was painful to watch.

Smith and Barkley worked on their bracket - with the usual back-and-forth that Johnson egged on - and their insights did add some value.

And I'm not sure I understand the "live audience" which sounds like roughly 23 people.#MarchMadness#SelectionSunday — Bob Herzog (@Bob_Herzog) March 11, 2018

They're doing the selection show in front of a live audience? This is lamer than I thought. #SelectionSunday — Jay Sarkar (@WLNSJaySarkar) March 11, 2018

The broadcast wasn’t universally panned.

“I thought it was exciting the way you unveiled it,” Kansas coach Bill Self said in an interview on the show.

Follow Perez on Twitter @byajperez