https://www.usatoday.com/tech/
5 sleeper teams to keep an eye on when filling out your NCAA tournament bracket
CLOSE The selection committee has spoken. The 68 teams have been revealed, and this is what you need to know about selection Sunday. Time

Houston Cougars guard Rob Gray (32) and teammate Gabe Grant (20) celebrate their win over Wichita State. (Photo: Reinhold Matay, USA TODAY Sports)

Missouri: Michael Porter Jr.’s late-season return makes the Tigers one of the most intriguing teams in the NCAA tournament, but his unimpressive outing in the SEC tourney — which resulted in an early exit to Georgia — likely will raise questions about the Tigers’ irhythm. Don’t listen to that noise. Porter was able to get some of the rust off in that first game back and coach Cuonzo Martin has chip-on-their-shoulder players who had to prove themselves without their star freshman. Expect for Missouri to make a surprise run.

More: Cincinnati and Tennessee are two underrated teams that demand March respect

Bubble Watch: Winners and losers from championship weekend

More: Dan D'Antoni lectures on 'damn analytics' as Marshall earns Cinderella NCAA bid

Florida: Another SEC team, the Gators have a lot of nice ingredients to make some noise in March, starting with a dynamic backcourt that can fill it up. Jalen Hudson (15.3 ppg), Egor Koulechov (13.6 ppg), KeVaughn Allen (11.3 ppg) and Chris Chiozza (11.2 ppg, 6.1 rpg) give coach Mike White a four-guard offense that will be tough for NCAA opponents to stop. Florida had an unexpected SEC tourney exit to Arkansas, but before that had major statement wins over Auburn and Kentucky. Look for UF to outplay its seeding line, and perhaps replicate last year’s Elite Eight finish.

Texas Tech: A Big 12 tournament loss to West Virginia in the semifinals and a late-season rough patch — dropping five of seven — might tell a misleading story about the Red Raiders and disguise the potential of a sleeping giant poised for a deep tourney run. Texas Tech is just getting fully healthy and will surely benefit from being battle-tested in the country’s toughest conference. Whichever team draws TTU will be getting a defensively sound opponent. Chris Beard’s group ranks in the top-20 nationally in points allowed (under 65 a game) and field goal percentage defense (40%). Keenan Evans serves as the key, averaging 17.5 points a game.

Seton Hall: The Pirates, a preseason top-15 team, underachieved most of 2017-18 . No matter. They’ve still got all the dimensions to go on a deep run. This is a veteran group led by great guard play (the three-headed monster of Desi Rodriguez, Myles Powell and Khadeen Carrington) and a double-double machine in Angel Delgado. Seton Hall has started to hit its stride late, and nail-biting losses to Villanova and Butler conceal how surging this squad really is.

Houston: Overshadowed by Cincinnati and Wichita State, potential Final Four teams, the Cougars maybe didn’t get the love they deserved in building a solid all-around tourney profile and finishing tied for second in the AAC, (seventh among conferences in RPI). Houston has beaten the Bearcats and Shockers and can easily play spoiler in the tournament against a similarly tough (and better-seeded) opponent. Coach Kelvin Sampson has a veteran group, fueled by Rob Gray (18.1 points and 4.7 assists per game), that utilizes a deep bench and plays with grit — key for teams that fare well in the Dance.