https://www.nytimes.com/section/technology
What College Students Really Think About Free Speech
Photo

To some, free speech on college campuses appears to be under attack, but what do the students themselves think? A study released on Monday offers some answers based on a survey of more than 3,000 of them.

The survey, a collaboration among five groups, finds that college students feel increasingly stifled on campus and online, and while they equally value free speech and inclusivity, they wrestle with how best to balance the two.

“What you see is a generation that’s struggling with really deep questions about how to be a pluralistic society and a pluralistic campus and how to be an open society and an open campus,” said Sam Gill, vice president of communities and learning at the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation, which led the effort with Gallup, the polling company.

Students differed widely on how to strike that balance. Here’s a look at some of the findings of the survey, which was co-sponsored by the American Council on Education, the Charles Koch Foundation and the Stanton Foundation.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Tension between free expression and inclusion

College students believe about equally in free expression and pluralism, with nearly 90 percent saying that free speech protections are very or extremely important to American democracy and more than 80 percent saying the same of promoting an inclusive and diverse society.

Photo

When forced to choose, a majority of students said that diversity and inclusivity were more important than free speech, though opinions differed widely by demographic.

Inclusivity is more important than speech, majority of students say When forced to choose, a small majority of college students say inclusivity is more important than free speech, though they widely believe in the importance of both to democracy. Diverse and inclusive society Protecting free speech rights All Men Women Whites Blacks At historically black institutions Democrats Independents Republicans 53% 46 39 61 64 35 47 52 68 31 53 46 66 34 49 50 30 69 Diverse and inclusive society Free speech rights All Men Women Whites Blacks At historically black institutions Democrats Independents Republicans 53% 46 39 61 64 35 47 52 68 31 53 46 66 34 49 50 30 69

Those who belong to groups historically or currently in positions of power — white students, men or Republicans — tended to favor free speech, while nearly two in three students who were black, women or Democrats favored inclusivity. That gap was widest along partisan lines, with 66 percent of Democrats saying inclusivity was more important and 69 percent of Republicans saying the same of free speech.