https://www.nytimes.com/section/technology
Beauty, Pride and Power in Photos by Lola Flash
Advertisement

lens Beauty, Pride and Power in Photos by Lola Flash Image Raven O., from the “Legends” series, featuring portraits of people who have spearheaded L.G.B.T.Q. movements. Credit Lola Flash

To experience Lola Flash’s portraits is to come face to face, eye to eye, with a subject who will not stay on the margins or in the shadows. From classic portraits of accomplished older women and rich-hued photos of cultural trendsetters to portraits of people who question gradations of skin color or gender roles, her images are hardly mute. They are strong, dignified, happy and proud.

It helps that for almost all of these images she uses a 4x5 view camera with transparency film, which makes her not only take her time, but also telegraphs to her subject that this sitting is serious business.

“Especially now with selfies everywhere and all these people taking pictures of themselves, the camera says to them, ‘Lola Flash is here and she wants someone who looks dignified,’” she said. “It’s about beauty, pride and power. They’re going to sit up straight and strike a pose. For all of my different series, gone are the days of Massa with people slumped over and not being able to look anybody in the face. Now, we stand up straight.”

Image Robin Cloud, from the “Legends” series. Credit Lola Flash

Image Sur Ron (Sur), from the “Legends” series. Credit Lola Flash

After about 32 years of making pictures with hardly any time to rest, Flash is standing a little taller herself these days, thanks to a retrospective exhibit of her various projects at the Pen and Brush Gallery in Manhattan. It has allowed her — and us — to step back and take in the work of an artist who has stayed true to herself.

Her entry into photography in mid-1980s New York City coincided with her involvement in the movement to heighten awareness of H.I.V. and AIDS as well as the social and political factors that surrounded the issue. ACT UP was starting out, and she embraced its mission, which used direct action and outrage to keep the issue front and center.

“I had wanted to be in the civil rights movement, but I was a bit too young,” she said. “I was too young for the demos about the Vietnam War. I wasn’t happy there was an AIDS crisis, but I was happy to be part of a movement and see how we as a people can get things done.”

Image Heather Litteer, from the “Legends” series. Credit Lola Flash

Some of her strongest images from those early days of the crisis were deeply political, given the prejudice and lack of official urgency at a time when the disease was essentially a death sentence. Her images were surreal, with saturated and inverted tones. She called the process “cross-color,” in which landscapes seemed ablaze and figures like pale phantoms. They could appear menacing, even. She stumbled on the process after deciding she had wasted enough paper — and money — on Cibachrome prints. At school, she found a stock of negative paper that allowed her to print her slides in a different way.

“I started thinking everything black became white, yellow became purple and everything was the opposite,” she said. “Thinking of myself as a black person and how some people say black is bad and white is pure, in my pictures, I’m teasing people. I learned to dial in more yellow or magenta, or make skin tones blue or green. I took away what the people were. Sometimes gender got blurred. It created a world that was more inviting and less judgmental, but still colorful.”

Image “NIH Demo — ACT UP,” 1990. From the “Cross-Color” series, featuring images that reflect on the AIDS crisis. Credit Lola Flash

Image “K is for K.K.K.,” circa 1993. From the “Cross-Color” series. Credit Lola Flash

The emotional toll of those years — during which funerals for young lives cut short by AIDS became a painful routine — led her to move to London in the 1990s, where she went to graduate school. She started covering events for a gay publication, as well as falling in with “a bunch of leather girls” she began to photograph. She also turned to more traditional portraiture as she began exploring various themes that she turned into projects.

Her portrait series since then have included explorations of skin tone among black people, accomplished women over 70 years of age, people who challenged traditional concepts of gender, and trendsetters in the urban underground cultural scene. She had a drive to present her point of view — that of a queer black woman — in a way that defied expectations.

“The queer black voice had a very separate experience than white queers,” she said. “A lot of the time white photographers would sprinkle in people to say they are being inclusive. I do that purposefully in all my projects because I wanted to level the playing field. It’s like tit for tat. It’s my way of showing more people of color in a more beautiful way and showing white people how it feels to be tokenized.”

Image Coreen, from the “Salt” series, featuring portraits of women over 70. Credit Lola Flash

Image Agnes, from the “Salt” series. Credit Lola Flash

Yet the older she gets, the more Flash, 59, wants to produce work for her own community, giving its members portrayals in which they see themselves at their strongest. She is also determined to show them naturally, without lighting or processing tricks.

“I wanted to show the beauty in my community to my community,” she said. “I want to preach to the converted, since for so many years that was not part of my existence. I hate the idea of being tolerated. I like being accepted. Now there is a climate to look and accept, or at least wrestle with it.”

While her show is billed as a retrospective, Flash has no intention of slowing down her production of deeply felt images that delve into questions of identity, race and gender. And she will continue to ask her subjects to reflect on a question she asks right before each sitting — think about power and pride — where sometimes the answer can be startling, as when she did a portrait of the photographer Carrie Mae Weems.

“I asked her to think about someone she really admired,” Flash said. “Carrie was like, ‘O.K., I’ll think about you.’ With that, I went under my dark cloth and told myself to keep it together. I was shaking and blushing. Come on girl, you got this.”

She does.

Image Toni Parks, from the “Salt” series. Credit Lola Flash

Image Kevin, from the “Surmise” series, which explores how genderqueer people are perceived. Credit Lola Flash

Image Shigi, from the “(Sur)passing” series, featuring portraits that explore race and identity. Credit Lola Flash

Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.