https://www.nytimes.com/section/technology
The Earliest Days of American Photography
Advertisement

lens The Earliest Days of American Photography Image A locomotive on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, near Oakland, Md., circa 1860. Credit The Metropolitan Museum of Art

The most forged documents in financial history were the work of ordinary rascals who needed little skill to make money. All they needed was a camera.

Newspaper articles in the late 1850s began warning of the danger of counterfeit bank notes that had been made using photography. Both had appeared in the United States in the 1830s after President Andrew Jackson eliminated the federal banking system, allowing private banks to issue paper currency under guidelines set by each state. At one point, forgeries accounted for 40 percent of the nation’s currency, with photography often to blame.

“For a time, the ease of modification and duplication enabled by negative-positive photography seemed to be a threat rather than a benefit,” said Mazie Harris, the curator of Paper Promises: Early American Photography, a new exhibition at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles which runs through May 27.

Image The Armstead and White photograph gallery. Circa 1861-1865. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

Image Slaves on the Toller farm in 1862. By Alexander Gardner. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

Image Blanket boats ferrying men and field artillery over the Potomac River in July 1863. By A.J. Russell. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

Having just been introduced by two men working independently of each other — Henry Fox Talbot in England who claimed to invent (negative) photography and Louis Daguerre, in France, the (positive) silver-plated copper image — photography had a multitude of possible identities in the United States. The daguerreotype became one of the most popular methods after it was introduced in the United States, with studios established all over New York. But a very reproducible paper photograph was also used experimentally . And counterfeit money, the Getty Museum’s original inspiration for the exhibition, was only one of photography’s early uses.

“I think we tell this tidy story about how the history of photography works,” Ms. Harris said. “But the real history is a lot messier and more interesting than that. I was interested in the fact that there was this period of kind of unlimited potential, the earliest years of the medium when it really could have been anything.”

She added: “It was a brand new medium, no one knew what it had to look like or where it was going to go, and so there are all these paths open to the photographers of the time. Is it going to be A one-of-a-kind medium? Is it going to be a reproducible medium? Is it going to be on glass, or mica? Is it going to be circular?”

Image Abraham Lincoln and his son Thomas on Feb. 5, 1865. By Alexander Gardner. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

Image A portrait of a Dakota Sitter, circa 1862-1864. By J. E. Whitney. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

The merging of science and art was fertile ground for scientists and doctors, who experimented with glass, iron, leather, cloth and mica. John Adams Whipple, an American photographer and inventor, took out an advertisement in a popular bank-note report that cataloged currency, both legitimate and fraudulent, citing “crystalotypes,” or his own paper photographic process. The technique, which he invented to outrun his competitors, made paper prints from glass negatives.

“Made from life, or copied from daguerreotypes in the usual style,” he wrote, “up to portrait size, finished in crayon, or colored to equal the nest oil paintings in tone and finish — giving the likenesses in a manner that cannot be obtained in any other way.”

These illicit uses, often overlooked in photographic history, actually sabotaged the medium . Around the same time, the United States grappled with impermanent state borders and political triggers that would lead to the Civil War.

Image A girl in a dark jacket, circa 1857. By O.H. Willard. Credit Collection of Charles Isaacs and Carol Nigro

Image A portrait of Frederick Langenheim from 1849. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

“I sort of joked that the subtitle for the exhibition would be ‘Paper Photography in the Not-So United States,’” Ms. Harris said. “I mean, the United States isn’t even really the U.S. as we know it now. There were all these territories, the borders were really ill-defined. I got interested in this idea of sort of territorial negotiations. How are you negotiating these kind of geographic territories? How are you negotiating these medium, these territories between media?”

She continued: “It was just a really messy period, and so I think that if we put it in that kind of international context, then you see that Americans were really trying to find a place for themselves amid what’s going on in Europe.”

Still, the photographs in the show, no matter their circumstances, are beautiful. Some portraits are featured in the negative with the glow of golden light illuminating details.

“Sometimes you see a photo from the past and it just blows you away,” Ms. Harris said. “You think, ‘I saw someone exactly like that on the subway yesterday.’ These photographs really reach out and grab you and pull you into the past or pull themselves into the present.”

Image On battle field of Antietam. Maryland, Sept. 1862. By Alexander Gardner. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

Image The Oso House in Bear Valley, in Mariposa County, Calif., circa 1859-60. By Carleton Watkins. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

Image Lola Montez, circa 1858. Photographed by the Meade Brothers. Credit Stephen White, Collection II

Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.