https://www.nytimes.com/section/technology
Finding Tenderness in Communities Affected by Manila’s Anti-Drug Killings
Advertisement

lens Finding Tenderness in Communities Affected by Manila’s Anti-Drug Killings Image A child looks on as the police tape off sections off her neighbor’s house in Manila after a drug-related killing in her neighbor’s bathroom. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Hannah Reyes Morales photographed more than 20 corpses, as well as police officers and grieving families throughout Manila in 2016.

She was not alone.

Many local and international photographers were often nearby documenting the death toll from the brutal war on drugs started by Rodrigo Duterte, the Philippine president.

After a few nights, she grew tired of photographing the murder scenes that dominated the coverage. She admired her colleagues’ commitment to documenting the killings, but she felt she had little to add that was new. Instead, she turned her attention to the residents of the densely packed slums where most of the bodies were found.

“Crowds of families and children would gather to see what was going on, to see the journalists, to see the body, to see the police,” she said. “And then after the body would be packed up, people would retreat back into their homes very quietly. And I knew that the next day that they would have just a normal day.”

Image A young family in the streets outside a shanty community in Manila. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image A train running through a Manila slum. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image Filipino girls playing sungka, a popular game in the Philippines. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Most of the international coverage focused on the bodies and where they were found, Ms. Morales, 27, explained. But there are also “people and communities that continue to live amid all this violence and all this death.”

Since they were often overlooked, she said, she decided to photograph the daily lives of residents of these impoverished neighborhoods and put “a human face on those who are most affected.”

Ms. Morales returned to the scenes where she had photographed bodies and got to know the people who lived there. And she kept going back, visiting people at home and listening to their stories. Some of the people she photographed had lost a loved one to the drug wars, but many of them were neighbors .

The Philippine government insists that fewer than 4,000 people have been killed since Mr. Duterte took office in 2016. But last month, Human Rights Watch estimated that more than 12,000 suspected drug users and dealers, mostly from poor families, have died in the crackdown. Many of these killings occurred in a handful of very poor neighborhoods throughout Manila.

Image A woman and her dog at home in one of Manila's shanty communities. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image A young girl dressed as an undead bride in her neighborhood, where there have been multiple drug-related deaths. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image Jefferson, a developmentally disabled boy, smiles with his caretaker in the shanty home where he lives. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

International news media outlets paid attention as the body count skyrocketed in 2016, but most foreign journalists drifted away even as the killings continued through 2017. Between other assignments Ms. Morales continued to photograph the people who lived amid the violence.

Ms. Morales grew up in Manila, where she lived in a modest home with her single mother and more than a dozen relatives. It was, she said, “a simple life.” Going to school, she passed by informal settlements where people lived in ramshackle houses. She attended an all-girls Catholic school run by activist nuns, where part of the curriculum took students to visit these neighborhoods to see how others lived and to help them.

In high school, Ms. Morales volunteered to tutor children in these communities in reading and writing. Though she was not wealthy, she was “ luckier then they were,” she said. Yet she identified with these children and working with them was a formative experience.

Image Caroline and Anne during a birthday party in the shanty community San Andres Bukid. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image A pickup basketball game. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image Jerome Clemente, right, with his family in the home built by his brother, who was killed in the anti-drug campaign. Jerome named his newborn child after his brother. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

“I was always very much aware and curious about their lives, and I was already interested in photography, but I didn’t have a camera yet,” she said. “I wanted to photograph them, but l just didn’t have the means.”

Ms. Morales studied communication at the University of the Philippines, where she took a photography class. She got an internship with EPA, the European Pressphoto Agency, during which she had a photo published on Lens in Photos of the Day. She has been on assignment for National Geographic and CNN Philippines and has photographed for and contributed reporting to The New York Times.

Though the killings have slowed, Ms. Morales continues working on her project whenever she is home. Most of the people she photographs take pride in their community, she said, though gun violence was “just like a matter of fact for them and a part of daily life.” Her subjects are “well aware of the cards they have been dealt,” she said, yet “full of grace and very resilient.”

“We Filipinos are a hopeful people,” Ms. Morales said. “The tenderness and the love that I try to convey in the images for me is a part of the Filipino resilience — they keep their quality of life going even as all of this violence is happening around you.”

Image Residents of a shanty community whose homes burned down gather in a basketball court. Over 200 families lost their homes, and many cannot find the money to rebuild. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image A young boy examines a flower that his sister picked. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image A family living in a shanty community watches television. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image A young girl sits where the Pasig River meets the Manila Bay, by the shanty community where she lives. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. Hannah Reyes Morales is on Instagram. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.

James Estrin, the co-editor of Lens, joined The Times as a photographer in 1992 after years of freelancing for the newspaper and hundreds of other publications. @JamesEstrin







