https://www.reuters.com/news/archive/technologyNews
Reuters.com
More ADventures Headlines

Nielsen sues comScore to block new TV ratings service NEW YORK Nielsen Holdings Plc filed a lawsuit on Friday to stop comScore Inc from using its technology to launch a competing service for measuring television audiences.

Facebook to overhaul political ads after threat of U.S. regulation SAN FRANCISCO Facebook Inc on Thursday launched an overhaul of how it handles paid political advertisements, giving a concession to U.S. lawmakers who have threatened to regulate the world's largest social network over secretive ads that run during election campaigns. |

Trump dismisses Facebook ads controversy as part of 'Russia hoax' WASHINGTON U.S. President Donald Trump on Friday questioned Facebook Inc's decision to overhaul how it handles paid political advertisements amid investigations into alleged Russian interference in U.S. elections. |

Time Inc in talks to sell assets; warns on third-quarter ad revenue softness Time Inc said on Friday it was looking to sell several assets, including Time Inc UK, and warned it experienced more-than-anticipated softness in both print and advertising revenue during the current quarter.

Kremlin: Russia did not use Facebook adverts to sway U.S. election MOSCOW Russia did not place adverts on Facebook Inc to try to influence the 2016 U.S. Presidential election, Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said on Friday.

Australia's Seven West Media says Prime takeover offer falls through SYDNEY Top Australian television broadcaster Seven West Media Ltd and smaller Prime Media Group Ltd said they held takeover talks which ended without a deal, a faltering start to likely media consolidation brought on by deregulation.

EU eyes solo move to increase tax on online giants, risking U.S. anger BRUSSELS The European Commission said on Thursday it may seek to implement tax reform to raise more revenue from online giants without the backing of the United States and other rich nations, in a move that could spark a new transatlantic dispute.

Twitter to meet Congressional panel probing 2016 election Twitter Inc representatives will meet with the U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence staff next week in relation to inquiries into the 2016 U.S. presidential election, a company representative said.

Democrats seek disclosure after Russia-backed political ads Democratic U.S. lawmakers on Wednesday urged the Federal Election Commission to require transparency for social media advertising after Russians bought U.S. political ads on Facebook Inc in an alleged attempt to influence the 2016 elections.

Facebook to add more human review to ad system: COO Sandberg SAN FRANCISCO Facebook Inc will add "more human review and oversight" to its ad-buying system, Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg said on Wednesday, responding to rising criticism that automated processes have allowed people to buy discriminatory ads.

EU ready to move alone on digital tax if no global deal BRUSSELS The European Commission said the EU should proceed with an overhaul of taxes on digital firms even if the rest of the rich world did not follow suit, a draft report said.

U.S. appeals court blocks San Francisco ordinance on soda health warnings SAN FRANCISCO A U.S. appeals court sided with the beverage industry on Tuesday, granting its request to block a San Francisco ordinance mandating health warnings for soda and other sugary drinks.

App Annie's new product offers insight into consumer trends in China FRANKFURT The pioneer of mobile app analytics, App Annie, on Tuesday said it has begun tracking Android app usage in China, a landmark for understanding consumer behavior in the world's top smartphone market, which increasingly sets the pace for global trends.

Google disables offensive ad keywords found by BuzzFeed Alphabet Inc's Google said it had disabled a "majority" of the offensive keywords that BuzzFeed found could be used by advertisers to target people searching for racist and anti-Semitic topics.

Vivendi notified Italy government about its holding in Telecom Italia: source PARIS Vivendi notified the Italian government on Friday about its holding in Telecom Italia as required by the authorities, a source close to the matter said.

Facebook removes feature that let ads reach 'Jew haters' SAN FRANCISCO Facebook Inc said on Thursday it was temporarily disabling the ability of advertisers to target based on people's self-reported education and job information after a report that those features allowed targeting based on anti-Semitic topics.

Facebook to launch election integrity effort in Canada TORONTO Facebook Inc , under pressure over its role in possible Russian meddling in last year's U.S. presidential election, said it plans an election integrity initiative to protect Canada's next vote from cyber threats.