http://www.drudgereport.com/
The Papers
Image caption A number of papers carry the latest from the investigation into the attempted murder of the Russian ex-spy and his daughter in Salisbury a week ago. The i reports the government's "astonishing" warning for up to 500 diners and pub-goers to wash their clothes.

Image caption The Metro also carries the warning for people to clean their possessions, after traces of the nerve agent used to poison Sergei and Yulia Skripal were found in the restaurant and pub they visited before being found on a park bench.

Image caption The Daily Express is among a number of papers to question why it took officials a week to alert people to wash their belongings, as the paper describes reaction from some local residents as "furious".

Image caption Similarly, the Daily Telegraph says some residents are "outraged" by the delay in advice to those who might have been contaminated by the nerve agent. One local tells the paper: "Enough of this cloak and dagger stuff, let the public know what's going on."

Image caption Meanwhile the Times reports that Theresa May is "on the verge of publicly blaming Russia" for the attack as she prepares to meet with the government's National Security Council on Monday. Expulsions and sanctions against Russia could follow, the paper adds. Russia denies any involvement.

Image caption A picture of football pundit Jamie Carragher appearing to spit from a car window appears on the Sun's front page, as the former Liverpool player is accused of spitting at a teenager who was teasing him about his former teams defeat by Manchester United.

Image caption The Daily Mirror has the same picture, taken from a video recording, and adds that Mr Carragher has since apologised saying "What I did was wrong", while the teenager's mother called it "disgusting".

Image caption Research by the Guardian finds that some of the salaries of vice-chancellors at British universities "far out-strip" that of public sector officials like council leaders and health trust bosses.

Image caption Multinational businesses are now paying less tax than before the 2008 financial crisis, say Financial Times analysts, who add that a decade of government efforts to cut deficit and reform taxes "has left the corporate world largely unscathed".

Image caption The Daily Mail follows up on an investigation from the Sunday Mirror which found that up to 1,000 children could have been groomed over 40 years in Telford, Shropshire. MPs are calling for an inquiry, the paper adds.

Image caption According to the Daily Star, presenter Jeremy Clarkson is furious at claims - which he has dismissed - that his big budget Grand Tour programme is to be axed and his "career has hit the skids".

The attack on a former Russian spy and his daughter, in Salisbury, remains on several of the front pages - more than a week after they were poisoned.

The Daily Telegraph reports on a backlash from people living in the city, about why it took the authorities seven days to issue a warning about possible contamination.

One resident, who was in the Mill pub around the same time as Sergei and Yulia Skripal, tells the paper he's not reassured, as he doesn't know all the facts.

In the Guardian, another local says the Army should have been brought in earlier - and another tells the paper that the official response appears to have been a bit slow.

Image copyright EPA

In its editorial, the Daily Express says there's a growing sense that, with the exception of the police, the authorities have been extremely slow to act.