https://www.usatoday.com
Behind the scenes: The Capitol chaos when Eliot Spitzer resigned 10 years ago
CLOSE Gov. Eliot Spitzer resigned 10 years ago on March 12, 2008, after he was revealed to have solicited prostitutes while in office. It was an unprecedented event in New York history. Joseph Spector, Albany Bureau

Amid a prostitution scandal, New York Gov. Eliot Spitzer resigned in March 2008. His wife, Silda Wall Spitzer, stood at his side. (Photo: File Photo / Stephen Chernin)

ALBANY - Lt. Gov. David Paterson wasn't sure he was hearing it right when he got the call about 1:15 p.m. on March 10, 2008.

Gov. Eliot Spitzer's top aide, Richard Baum, called him from a bathroom inside Spitzer's Manhattan apartment to whisper that Spitzer was about to resign amid a prostitution scandal.

"He tells me this story," Paterson recalled earlier this month to the USA TODAY Network's Albany Bureau. "I can barely hear him because he’s in Spitzer’s bathroom in Spitzer’s apartment in New York City."

Paterson still wasn't sure what was going on. He asked his own aide, Charles O'Byrne, whether he had misheard it; perhaps it was a Spitzer investment company tied to a prostitution ring, not the 54th governor himself.

"Charles O’Byrne comes up and tells me basically, no, that’s not exactly the way it happened. And he told me what was really happening, and that drove the point home," Paterson continued.

"So I said to Charles, ‘What do you think I should be doing?’ And he said, ‘You might want to write down some notes, which in an hour we are going to call an inauguration speech.'"

The story is one of many nearly a dozen former Spitzer aides and lawmakers relayed in recent days as Monday marks the 10-year anniversary of his resignation — arguably the most shocking moment in New York political history.

News broke that Monday that Spitzer had solicited a prostitute — though he didn't immediately resign after all. That came two days later on Wednesday, March 12, 2008.

In between, the Capitol and Spitzer's New York City offices were in extraordinary chaos. No one knew whether Spitzer would leave or fight to stay in office. His aides debated his future and their own.

He was just 15 months into his first term.

Spitzer remains steadfast that his decision to leave office was the right one.

"Absolutely," Spitzer responded in an interview Tuesday.

"I don’t for a moment question that I made the right decision for my family, those whom I love and for the state."

More: Upstate, schmupstate: When did we last have a governor from our neck of the woods?

Driver's licenses sought for immigrants in N.Y.

NY's Big Breaks for Business: What our investigation found

The front page of the March 13, 2008, edition of the Rochester Democrat and Chronicle. It was the day after former Gov. Eliot Spitzer resigned. (Photo: D&C archives)

2:10 p.m Monday

When the news appeared on the New York Times website that Spitzer was tied to a prostitution ring, the first reaction by many was that it was a joke. Or maybe the website had been hacked.

This was the supposedly squeaky-clean Spitzer, the so-called Sheriff of Wall Street whom voters had swept into office in 2006 by a record margin after a crusading eight years as attorney general.

"I was absolutely convinced that it couldn’t be true," said Paul Larrabee, who was part of Spitzer's press office when he was attorney general and then for his first year as governor.

"All I ever saw was somebody who was focused on his work and a gentleman."

Said Richard Rifkin, Spitzer's special counsel: "It took us totally and completely by surprise."

Aides cried in their offices; others huddled together wondering what Spitzer would do. Some wondered if they would have a job in a few days. Many had left the private sector to join the Democrat's administration; now their careers were shattered.

Some aides knew the circumstances in the hours prior to the Times story posting at 2:10 p.m. A cabinet meeting earlier in the day filled in some top staff, but nobody knew if and when Spitzer would resign.

Even Paterson didn't know. Baum first told him Spitzer would resign, then called back an hour later to say Spitzer was still debating it.

Speculation was building that Monday morning that something was adrift.

Spitzer abruptly canceled a trip to the Capitol, staying instead in his Manhattan apartment.

Martin Mack, the deputy secretary for intergovernmental affairs, spent the morning organizing a visit to the Capitol by Cardinal Edward Egan and New York's bishops.

Then he found out Spitzer wasn't attending. Then he found out why.

"It was difficult and disappointing and hard on everyone," Mack said.

"People were just looking to each other for some guidance on just getting through the transition and keeping things as smooth as possible and prepare for the new governor."

Spitzer spoke publicly about 3:25 p.m. He didn't say if he would resign.

"I have disappointed and failed to live up to the standard I expected of myself," he said with his teary-eyed wife, Silda, at his side. "I must now dedicate some time to regain the trust of my family."

He ended, memorably, "I will report back to you in short order."

That was Monday.

Then-Gov. Eliot Spitzer joined by his wife, Silda, as he addressed reporters at a news conference March 10, 2008, during his prostitution scandal. (AP Photo/Mary Altaffer) (Photo: Mary Altaffer)

Back in Manhattan

Before and after the statement, Spitzer huddled with family and close advisers to consider his best course of action.

Should he immediately resign? Or maybe apologize, vow to get counseling and try to stay on?

Initially, Spitzer was poised to resign that Monday — as it was relayed to Paterson.

"He was drafting a resignation statement that he was going to make that day," recalled Lloyd Constantine, who was Spitzer's senior adviser and at his New York City apartment that Monday.

Constantine and Spitzer's family encouraged him to consider his options. So the Monday statement left it open over what Spitzer would do.

Constantine thought — and still believes — Spitzer had a chance to survive it. He wanted Spitzer to first go to a treatment facility in Arizona.

"I drafted a statement for him to read which was the implementation of our plan, which is 'I’m going away for a month, I’m going to get treatment, please treat my family well. I asked for nothing for myself. If (legislators) remove me, I will accept that,'" Constantine, who later wrote a book about Spitzer's time in office, said.

"I was hoping that was the statement he would have given."

That Tuesday, Spitzer realized he would not have the political support he needed to avoid a drumbeat of lawmakers calling for his resignation and perhaps starting impeachment proceedings.

Indeed, Spitzer had quickly worn out his political capital with the Legislature: He fought with the Assembly over appointing a state comptroller, and then he was embroiled in the Troopergate scandal — which accused him and his aides of using State Police to attack Senate Majority Leader Joseph Bruno, a Republican.

"It would have been very difficult to survive that because people were running away. No one was defending him in those first two or three days," said Sen. James Tedisco, R-Glenville, Schenectady County, who was then the Assembly minority leader and was threatening impeachment.

Spitzer, in his first month in office, referred to himself as a "f---in' steamroller" in a conversation with Tedisco.

"If I had to define Eliot Spitzer: extremely bright," Tedisco said. "But here’s the two things that brought him down: extremely full of himself, huge ego; and very vindictive. That caught up with him."

Spitzer also faced the prospect of criminal charges for paying for prostitutes through bank wires and across state lines. No charges were ever brought, in part, perhaps, because he resigned.

So by Tuesday night, Spitzer was convinced: He would step down.

"Over the course of my public life I have insisted, I believe correctly, that people, regardless of their position or power, take responsibility for their conduct," Spitzer said at 11:45 a.m. that Wednesday.

"I can and will ask no less of myself. For this reason, I am resigning from the office of governor, and at Lt. Gov. David Paterson's request, the resignation will be effective on Monday, March 17, a date that he believes will permit an orderly transition."

CLOSE Eliot Spitzer, who resigned as New York's governor amid a prostitution scandal in 2008, sounded a note of contrition on Jay Leno's "Tonight Show." Spitzer recently announced that he's running for NYC comptroller. (July 13) AP

Looking back

In an interview on Tuesday, Spitzer declined to go into the details of his internal deliberations, joking, "Frankly, I’m not sure I could get it right even if I tried to."

Sure, Spitzer thinks about what could have been. His aides said he was turning the corner after a rough first year and was poised for a strong first term. At the height of his political career, he was even mentioned as a potential presidential candidate.

But Spitzer, 58, said he doesn't dwell on it.

"I said that when I resigned. Obviously, I still feel it: There are many things I wish we had time to complete," he said.

"I’m not going to go through the litany. That’s kind of pointless at this moment in time, but obviously what we did when I was attorney general and the time I was governor I’m proud of and I hope contributed in a meaningful way."

Spitzer had a brief broadcast TV career, then ran unsuccessfully for New York City comptroller in 2013.

Now Spitzer has turned to growing the real estate empire started by his late father, Bernard. Spitzer speaks with enthusiasm about his plans to expand the Brooklyn skyline with new residential developments and perhaps add apartments in other outer boroughs.

Will he run for office again? He responds before the question is even finished.

"One thing I can say unequivocally is that that will not happen. I am done," Spitzer said.

"I had a wonderful stretch in life where I participated in a way I believe in. Life is a series of chapters, and now I love what I am doing. And frankly, I think the baton has rightly been passed to a new generation, and that’s a good thing."

Televisions lights and cameras are positioned in front of the state Capitol in Albany, N.Y., Tuesday, March 11, 2008. Gov. Eliot Spitzer apologized on Monday after he was accused of involvement in a prostitution ring. He did not elaborate on the scandal, which drew calls for his resignation. (AP Photo/Mike Groll) (Photo: Mike Groll, AP)

Toward the future

Spitzer still remains in the news, but not always for his housing plans. He has been embroiled in a court case because of his past relationship with a former Russian escort.

Spitzer shrugged it off.

"I understand we live in a time and an era when that is the nature of society," he said. "I don’t blame anybody else. I don’t feel sorry for myself, and I don’t do anything other than say: OK, it is what it is, get up, go forward and do something useful. It’s the only way to live."

Politics and government, though, are still topics he likes to talk about.

Asked about his development efforts in the city versus the struggles of the upstate New York economy, he questioned the state's policies.

"It takes long-term, thoughtful, methodical investment and smart policies, rather than spasmodic, failed economic development targeting one-off businesses that don’t usually produce," he responded.

"I think it’s fair to say that the upstate economic development programs of the past couple years haven’t worked — all the TV advertising that I see on CNBC, notwithstanding. And frankly, I don’t know what all that money is for and what it accomplishes."

He continued, "There needs to be smart investment in infrastructure, in education, keeping taxes down, building our academic institutions in the new economy. That is what draws jobs, businesses and creativity."

In the state Capitol, on the second floor where the governor's offices are located, is the Hall of Governors — where portraits of New York's past governors hang.

Paterson's portrait is there. Spitzer's is not.

Does he think about having his portrait outside his former offices one day?

"I hadn’t even thought about that in quite a while. I’ll reserve judgment on that one," Spitzer chuckled.

He added:

"It’s not on my bucket list, I can say that."

JSpector@Gannett.com

Joseph Spector is chief of USA TODAY Network's Albany Bureau.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/2tuG8wT