https://www.usatoday.com
National Guardsman who threatened to kill Mike Pence sentenced
CLOSE After a week of hard work in the White House, Vice President Mike Pence likes to wind down with a supreme thin crust pizza and non-alcoholic beer. Veuer's Sam Berman has the full story. Buzz60

William Dunbar (Photo: Richland Township (Pa.) Police)

INDIANAPOLIS — A Pennsylvania man has been sentenced to six months in federal prison for threatening to kill Vice President Mike Pence.

U.S. District Judge Kim Gibson issued the sentence Friday to William Dunbar, 23, of Berlin, Pa.

According to the U.S. Department of Justice, three witnesses said Dunbar made the statements days before the vice president, a former governor of Indiana, was set to appear as a keynote speaker at the Flight 93 National Memorial in Shanksville, Pa., on Sept. 11.

More: Mike Pence: U.S. can end legal abortion 'in our time'

More: Vice President Pence's perfect weekend: Pizza and non-alcoholic beer

Local police told the Johnstown Tribune-Democrat that Dunbar was on duty last fall at the Army National Guard Training Center, 90 miles from the memorial, when he said, “If someone pays me enough money, I will kill the vice president.”

Vice President Pence speaks to visitors at the Flight 93 National Memorial on Sept. 11, 2017, in Shanksville, Pa. (Photo: Jeff Swensen, Getty Images)

The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette reported that a Secret Service agent said Dunbar said, "I'll make a terroristic threat, I'll kill him. I don't give a (expletive). There's nothing they're going to do."

The newspaper also reported that the base where Dunbar was stationed did not allow him to be near guns and that members of the community lived in fear of him.

Dunbar was arrested by police on Sept. 8, days before Pence gave his speech at the memorial site.

His sentence also includes six months of home detention and a requirement to receive mental health treatment.

Nate Chute is a producer with IndyStar, part of the USA TODAY NETWORK. Follow him on Twitter: @nchute

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2p6ApIl