https://www.usatoday.com
Scientology Network will make TV debut Monday, the church says
CLOSE The Church of Scientology is getting its own TV network. USA TODAY

The Scientology Cross perched atop the Church of Scientology in Los Angeles. The church announced Sunday that the Scientology Network, with original programming related to the religion, will arrive Monday. (Photo: Richard Vogel/AP)

After years of being skewered by programs like Leah Remini: Scientology and the Aftermath, the controversial church with a celebrity following is taking to TV to tell its own truth.

The church announced on its official Twitter account Sunday that the Scientology Network will debut Monday (8 ET/5 PT). According to the organization, its programming will be available on DirecTV, Apple TV, Roku, Fire TV, iTunes, Google Play and the website Scientology.tv.

DirecTV representative Steven Schwadron confirmed Monday's DirecTV launch to USA TODAY.

"HELLO WORLD, and greetings from Scientology Media Productions in Hollywood, CA," read a tweet from @ScientologyTV, an account set up for the endeavor. "It's TIME for us to tell OUR story ..." The post also included a promotional video.

"The only thing more interesting than what you've heard is what you haven't," the promo promises. The ad also features an e-meter, described as "the cutting edge of spiritual technology." According to Scientology's website, the electronic instrument is used by auditors in sessions with members to check they are addressing "the correct area in order to discharge the harmful energy connected with that portion of the preclear’s reactive mind."

"It's actually making a difference in the world," a voice says offscreen in the video. "That's what it's all about."

three, two, one...HELLO WORLD, and greetings from Scientology Media Productions in Hollywood, CA!



It's TIME for us to tell OUR story...



WELCOME to the SCIENTOLOGY NETWORK countdown to launch! pic.twitter.com/PCPaaW9M7c — Scientology Network (@ScientologyTV) March 11, 2018

According to a description in the iTunes store, the Scientology Network's app will allow users to watch the original series Meet A Scientologist and Voices for Humanity. A program titled L. Ron Hubbard: In His Own Voice and Scientology Principles films will also be available, iTunes says.

In A&E's series Scientology and the Aftermath, Remini, a member of the church until 2013, speaks with other former Scientologists who make several disparaging claims about the church, including that it turns a blind eye to sexual abuse.

The church previously denied the program's claims to USA TODAY, explaining, "Nothing about A&E’s Leah Remini 'docuseries' is honest. The singular goal of the program is to make money and boost ratings by spreading salacious lies to promote A&E’s ugly brand of religious intolerance, bigotry and hatred."

The religion has also been the subject of the films My Scientology Movie andGoing Clear: Scientology and the Prison of Belief.

The Church of Scientology did not immediately return USA TODAY's request for comment about the new network.

Earlier: Leah Remini says Scientology may be behind claims against Paul Haggis

Leah Remini: 'These people's stories are important to be told'

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2paHt6W