https://www.washingtonpost.com/
Woman accused of hiring hit men to get out of her hit-man-related troubles
The number of people Linda Tracy Gillman reportedly wants killed keeps growing.

Gillman, 70, has been accused three times of putting out contracts to kill people, beginning with her ex-husband, Duane Gillman, and his new wife.

The Herriman, Utah, woman was found guilty on Friday of one count of criminal solicitation — a first-degree felony — and acquitted of a second count for that attempt, local NBC affiliate KSL reported.

But those weren’t the only theatrics last week surrounding the case. She was also charged Friday with new counts of solicitation of a hit man.

It gets complicated, so stay with us here.

December 2016

Gillman was first charged with soliciting her condo’s handyman, Christian Olsen, to help arrange the killing of her ex-husband and his new wife, paying Olsen $5,000 and promising $100,000 more after the deed was done, according to court documents obtained by KSL. The plan involved making it look like Duane Gillman had an overdose so his life insurance payout could be collected, the documents read.

Olsen instead went to the police, and Gillman was arrested.

February 2017

A fellow inmate at the Salt Lake City County Jail accused Gillman of approaching her for arrangements to have Olsen killed for reporting her to authorities. “Gillman referred to herself as ‘the bank,’ and said that she ‘could make everything happen,’ ” the court documents said.

The accuser said Gillman used the word “greenlighted,” a known term for moving forward with a killing. Gillman was charged with obstruction of justice. That charge was dismissed in November, KSL reported.

Friday

On the same day that she was convicted of the original offense of seeking a hit man to kill her ex-husband, Gillman was charged with two new counts of criminal solicitation for allegedly seeking yet another hit man from jail.

“She had lined up an individual who would take the witness out,” Salt Lake County District Attorney Sim Gill said, referring to Olsen, “and, in addition, asked to have an attorney killed in an opposing civil action against her that she had lost,” according to KSL. That attorney, Brady Gibbs, represents a company that worked on her condo, I-D Electric, according to the Salt Lake City Tribune.

“My family, my law partners and I find the allegations extremely serious and deeply disturbing,” Gibbs told the newspaper, “especially considering Ms. Gillman’s recent conviction on a similar charge.” The company sued Gillman over $1,864 of unpaid work, the paper said.

A fellow inmate told investigators that Gillman said she would post her bail if she agreed to break into a storage unit and destroy two CDs of recordings of Gillman and others that were vital to the case. That person was then to arrange for killing Olsen if he did not sign a confession letter.

The trial

KSL reported that authorities in February intercepted a check that Gillman gave to a lawyer, which was filled out for $155,000, potentially bound for an unidentified assassin identified as “M.K.” on the envelope.

Gillman talked about “eliminating a witness,” “taking her out” and having “two homicides on our hands” in recordings, the Tribune reported, referring to the original attempt to kill her ex-husband. It was not clear where and when the recordings were made.

A woman who answered a phone number listed for Duane Gillman referred The Washington Post to his attorney, Richard Van Wagoner, who did not respond to a request for comment. Linda Gillman’s attorney, Colleen Coebergh, also did not respond to a request for comment. She argued in court that Olsen had manipulated her client for money. Olsen could not be reached for comment.

“I‘ve never seen anything like it,” Gill, the district attorney, said.

Read more:

This veterans home was a peaceful place for healing. Then a former patient returned with a rifle.

After the Las Vegas shooting massacre, survival can be excruciating