https://www.washingtonpost.com/
SNL’s disastrous ‘Bachelor’ finale stars Robert Mueller, who can’t commit to collusion
Can’t stop thinking about the disastrous finale of “The Bachelor?” Neither can “Saturday Night Live.”

The NBC show kicked off its latest episode by mashing up the painful-to-watch breakup between Arie Luyendyk Jr. and an unsuspecting Becca Kufrin with, yes, something Trump-related.

In the sketch, Becca (Cecily Strong) finally gets to see her man: special counsel Robert Mueller. Kate McKinnon essentially impersonates Arie in Mueller makeup while breaking the news.

“So, uh, you know that I’ve been struggling a little bit over the last few months just trying to figure this whole thing out and just grasp everything,” McKinnon’s Mueller says. “The reality is I don’t think I can give you everything that you want right now, and I think you sense that.”

Strong’s Becca replies: “So … what? You don’t have Trump on collusion?”

“I think I need to explore the possibility that I have a stronger case with some other stuff,” the fake Mueller replies. “I’m just trying to be honest with you in telling you I can’t commit to collusion right now.”

[ ‘The Bachelor’ tries to do damage control after disastrous finale, but only makes things worse ]

The fake Becca is trying to understand, saying “you indicted like 13 Russians and like everything that happened at Seychelles, that means nothing?”

“No, I mean the Seychelles were amazing and it’s definitely something,” he responds. “It’s just the more time that goes by, the more that I keep thinking about obstruction.”

The fake Becca can’t handle the embarrassment. “Collusion is literally the only thing that I’ve been looking forward to the past year.”

SNL has been relying on Alec Baldwin to play President Trump, whose appearances aren’t as regular this year compared with last. But the late-night show has been trying to find other ways to skewer the administration, mainly by focusing on others in Trump World.

[ Alec Baldwin says portraying Trump is ‘agony.’ Trump says watching Baldwin is the real agony. ]

Later in the episode, host Sterling K. Brown played HUD Secretary Ben Carson in a parody of the weepy NBC drama “This Is Us.” On SNL, it’s about the United States government: “This Is U.S.”

“Like ‘This Is Us,’ but without the parts that feel good,” reads the tagline. “You’ll be laughing through tears. Except without the laughing. So I guess just regular crying.”

Baldwin attracted some presidential Twitter ire earlier this month after the actor told the Hollywood Reporter that playing the president is “agony.” (It’s a comment he’s made repeatedly to other outlets.

[ Trump says SNL should bring back Darrell Hammond. Hammond says only if Lorne asks. ]

Trump responded by tweeting that Baldwin’s “dying mediocre career was saved by his terrible impersonation of me on SNL” and “it was agony for those who were forced to watch. Bring back Darrell Hammond, funnier and a far greater talent!”

Baldwin soon fired back on Twitter, writing, “I’d like to hang in there for the impeachment hearings, the resignation speech, the farewell helicopter ride to Mara-A-Lago.” And then he played the president during the show’s cold open the following day.