https://www.msn.com
Fox's Gasparino says Nunberg will seek treatment after Friday grand jury appearance
Video by Fox Business

Former Trump campaign aide Sam Nunberg told Fox Business Network's Charlie Gasparino that he intends to get treatment following a scheduled grand jury appearance on Friday.

Nunberg added he will now fully cooperate with special counsel Robert Mueller's investigation into possible collusion between Trump campaign associates and Russian officials.

"Just spoke w @NunbergSam he told me he's fully cooperating now w Mueller's team and he's intending to go get treatment following his grand jury appearance on Friday," Gasparino wrote on Twitter on Tuesday.

just spoke w @NunbergSam he told me he's fully cooperating now w Mueller's team and he's intending to go get treatment following his grand jury appearance on Friday - Charles Gasparino (@CGasparino) March 6, 2018

When asked by Daily Beast national editor Justin Miller what specifically Nunberg was being treated for, Gasparino referred to a Monday report he provided on Fox Business.

"When I interviewed [Nunberg], and I interviewed him early, he admitted to me he was drinking," Gasparino reported.

"He's also going to seek treatment for what ails him," he continued. "There's something. Drinking I believe is a big part of it and that's what happened yesterday."

Nunberg worked as an aide early on in President Trump's campaign until he was fired for allegedly breaching a confidentiality agreement and for revelations of racially charged social media posts he wrote in August 2015.

© Provided by The Hill He appeared on CNN and MSNBC among other outlets on Monday in interviews characterized as bizarre and unhinged, with many observers and CNN anchor Erin Burnett openly asking if he was intoxicated.

"We talked earlier about what people in the White House were saying about you, whether you were drinking, or on drugs, or whatever had happened today," Burnett said during the interview on CNN's "Outfront."

"Talking to you, I have smelled alcohol on your breath," Burnett continued.

Nunberg denied having had any alcohol.

"Well, I have not had a drink," he replied.

Burnett pressed the issue.

"Anything else?" Burnett asked.

Nunberg responded that he had taken some medication.

"No. Besides my meds. Anti-depressants, is that OK?" Nunberg said. "They can say whatever they want, I don't really care."

He has since apologized for his behavior and said "Erin was just doing her job" after the anchor faced criticism in some circles for interviewing Nunberg while he was seemingly impaired.