https://www.foxnews.com
Disney boss tells shareholders that ‘The View’ star Joy Behar apologized for anti-Christian remarks
ABC News’ “The View” star Joy Behar has reportedly apologized for recent comments that mocked Vice President Pence’s Christian faith.

Disney CEO Bob Iger said during a shareholder meeting that Behar apologized “for things she has said about Christians and the Trump administration,” according to Los Angeles Times reporter Daniel Miller.

“Iger agrees that was appropriate,” Miller added.

The Wall Street Journal’s Joe Flint tweeted that “Behar apologized to Pence” and Iger told shareholders he “took exception with Joy Behar's remarks.”

ABC did not immediately respond to request for confirmation.

Back on Feb. 13, “The View” panel criticized Pence's faith when co-host Sunny Hostin said, “I don’t know that I want my vice president, um — speaking in tongues and having Jesus speak to him.”

Behar chimed in, adding that hearing from Jesus is actually called “mental illness.” Pence himself didn’t appreciate the comments and slammed ABC News.

“To have ABC maintain a broadcast forum that compared Christianity to mental illness is just wrong,” Pence said during an appearance on C-SPAN following the controversial remarks. “It is simply wrong for ABC to have a television program that expresses that kind of religious intolerance.”

The Media Research Center launched a campaign to hold “View” co-hosts accountable for spewing “anti-Christian bigotry,” and ABC received over 30,000 phone calls from angry viewers.

The MRC, which says it's “America’s leading media watchdog in documenting, exposing and neutralizing liberal media bias,” posted contact information for 14 of the ABC News program’s advertisers as well as the president of ABC.

The controversy resulted in a variety of industry watchdogs suggesting it would be wise for ABC News to divorce itself from the show, which in a typical broadcast features four outspoken liberals and a single conservative.

“It's a pure opinion and infotainment program and therefore should be under its entertainment division,” The Hill media columnist Joe Concha told Fox News after Behar’s comments about Pence.

Meanwhile, liberal hero Oprah Winfrey recently told CBS’ “60 Minutes Overtime” that God has not told her to run for president despite widespread speculation that her infamous Golden Globes speech was a preview of a potential 2020 matchup with President Trump.

Behar, an outspoken liberal, did not accuse Winfrey of having mental illness.

According to reports, Disney’s annual shareholder meeting featured people who were angry about ESPN’s Jemele Hill’s anti-Trump rhetoric, booing and, at one point, Iger even asked the crowd to refrain from “airing personal grievances.” Protesters were reportedly outside the event regarding Disneyland wages.