https://www.npr.org/sections/national/
Applying at NPR
Applying at NPR

NPR Applicant Experience Pledge

So, you're thinking about applying for a job at NPR? Excellent choice! We applaud your great taste and decision-making skills. Since the application process can be shrouded at times behind generic email addresses that seem to go down a black hole, let's pull back the curtain a bit and give you a glimpse into what you can expect from NPR every step of the way, from application to interview to job offer.

Talent Wanted: Apply Here

Let's start with the basics. When positions open up, the description and applicant requirements are posted in our career portal site. Through this site you can search for openings by keyword, location and division. This is also where you will submit your application (including resume, cover letter and any additional materials) electronically. By creating a login and password you'll be able to check your application status at any time throughout the process. Pretty simple.

Application Review Process: People, Not Robots

You are human. We are human. Call us crazy, but we think that actual people make the best decisions when it comes to evaluating a resume. When reviewing your application, we don't rely on robots or keyword-matching software to select the strongest candidates. We rely on humans. Most often, this human is a member of the recruiting or HR team. Sometimes it's the hiring manager or someone who works closely with the hiring manager. In short, the people who know most about the position are reviewing each application to find the best candidates for the job.

Our goal is to review all applications within two to four weeks of submission. On average, we receive 200 applications per role, and we review them all. Sometimes it may take us a bit longer due to volume and/or unexpected circumstances, but delays beyond four weeks are an exception.

Interview and Beyond

If your application is selected to move to the next stage of the interview process, a member of the hiring team will reach out to you to conduct an introductory interview, usually over the phone.

When scheduling your phone and on-site meetings we'll be as flexible and accommodating as possible. Most of our roles require one on-site interview. Some require two. There may be rare instances when a third interview is required. That typically only happens for senior roles with a variety of stakeholders; it also means we really like you.

After the interviews, we'll conduct reference checks and a background check verifying employment, education, and any record of criminal conviction.

Have Questions? Email: careers@npr.org

Tweet Us: @nprjobs Q: I applied to a position but want to change my cover letter or upload an updated resume. How do I do that?

A: You can upload a new resume or cover letter by logging back in at this link, clicking My Presence, and then the Documents tab. You can update work experience, education, and skills on the Personal Information tab. If you are interested in applying for multiple jobs, be sure to name the cover letters to correspond with the specific job(s) title. Q: I forgot my password. How do I retrieve it?

A: You should make sure you use your e-mail address as your username. Log into our career site at this link and click "Sign in" and then "Create/Reset Your password" to reset your password. Q: I really want to work for NPR but don't have radio experience. How do I get that?

A: Working or volunteering with your local Member Station is a great way to gain experience in public radio. Q: If I work for NPR, am I required to use a tote bag?

A: No, tote bags are entirely optional.

Once that's clear, we'll present a competitive offer (see below). Then it's up to you: we hope you'll accept, given the excellent decision-making skills referenced in the introduction.

If you aren't selected for the job, don't give up. Our hiring needs are constantly evolving and we have new openings regularly.

Equal Opportunity

NPR is an Equal Opportunity Employer. We work hard to solicit candidates from a variety of sources to attract job applicants of diverse backgrounds, including those with disabilities and veterans. All candidates are evaluated solely on their qualifications to perform the work required.

Privacy and Confidentiality

Applicants are entitled to the security and confidentiality of their personal and professional background and data. Any decision to make that data available to others must be at the specific request, or with approval, of the applicant.

Compensation Clarity

When you apply to a job with NPR, we owe it to you to set clear expectations around compensation ranges. These ranges are based on market data, internal equity, and are commensurate with experience. Our union positions have clear compensation levels set by the SAG/AFTRA and NABET contracts.

Respect

You deserve respect, and will be treated accordingly throughout the application and interview process. We will make every effort to provide consistent communications regarding the status of your candidacy, regardless of the outcome of your application.