
BEIJING (AP) — Xi Jinping, already China's most powerful leader in more than a generation, received a vastly expanded mandate as lawmakers Sunday abolished presidential term limits that had been in place for more than 35 years and wrote his political philosophy into the country's constitution.

In one swift vote, the rubber-stamp legislature opened up the possibility of Xi being president for life, returning China to the one-man-rule system that prevailed during the era of Mao Zedong and the emperors who preceded him.

The package of constitutional amendments passed the nearly 3,000-member National People's Congress almost unanimously, with just two opposing votes and three abstentions. The vote further underscored the total domination of Chinese politics by the 64-year-old Xi, who is simultaneously the head of state, leader of the ruling Communist Party and commander of the 1 million-member armed forces.

The move upends a system enacted by former Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping in 1982 to prevent a return to the bloody excesses of a lifelong dictatorship typified by Mao's chaotic 1966-1976 Cultural Revolution.

"This marks the biggest regression in China's legal system since the reform and opening-up era of the 1980s," said Zhang Lifan, an independent Beijing-based political commentator.

"I'm afraid that this will all be written into our history in the future," Zhang said.

The change is widely seen as the culmination of Xi's efforts since being appointed leader of the party in 2012 to concentrate power in his own hands and defy norms of collective leadership practiced over the past two decades. Xi has appointed himself to head bodies that oversee national security, finance, economic reform and other major initiatives, effectively sidelining the Communist Party's No. 2 figure, Premier Li Keqiang.

In addition to scrapping the limitation that presidents can serve only two consecutive terms, the amendments also inserted Xi's personal political philosophy into the preamble of the constitution, along with phrasing that emphasizes the party's leadership.

"It is rare nowadays to see a country with a constitution that emphasizes the constitutional position of any one political party," Zhang said.

The legislature's hand-picked delegates began voting in the midafternoon, with Xi leading the seven members of the party's all-powerful Politburo Standing Committee in casting their ballots on a stage inside a cavernous hall. He placed his orange ballot paper in a red box bearing the official seal of state.

Rank-and-file deputies then rose to vote on the floor of the hall as jaunty instrumental music played. The process ended in 10 minutes, and delegates returned to their seats while the votes were counted.

Shortly after 3:50 p.m., the results were read over the public-address system and flashed briefly on a screen in the hall.

"The constitutional amendment item has passed," the announcer declared to polite applause.

Xi showed little emotion and remained seated to listen to a report on the work of the congress delivered by its outgoing chairman.

The slide toward one-man rule under Xi has fueled concern that Beijing is eroding efforts to guard against the excesses of autocratic leadership.

The head of the legislature's legal affairs committee, Shen Chunyao, dismissed those worries as "speculation that is ungrounded and without basis."

Shen told reporters that the party's 90-year history has led to a system of orderly succession to "maintain the vitality and long-term stability of the party and the people."

"We believe in the future that we will continue with this path and discover an even brighter future," Shen said.

In a sign of the issue's sensitivity, government censors have aggressively scrubbed social media of expressions ranging from "I disagree" to "Xi Zedong." A number of prominent Chinese figures have publicly protested the move, despite the risk of retaliation.

Officials have said the elimination of presidential term limits is aimed only at bringing the office of the president in line with Xi's other positions atop the Communist Party and the Central Military Commission, which do not impose term limits.

While some scholars questioned the wisdom of the move, others said they saw value in sending the message that Xi would be setting policy for many years to come.

"In fact, the more Xi Jinping's position is consolidated and the longer his governing time is to last, the more secure it is for the continuity of the policies," said Liu Jiangyong, a professor at Renmin University's School of International Relations.

The move has crushed faint hopes for political reforms among China's embattled liberal scholars and activists, who now fear even greater repression. China allows no political opposition in any form and has relentlessly persecuted independent groups seeking greater civic participation. Leading Chinese officials have repeatedly rejected any chance of adopting Western-style separation of powers or multiparty democracy.

Nevertheless, Xi's confident, populist leadership style and tough attitude toward corruption have won him significant popular support.

Zhao Minglin, 32, a vice president of a Beijing investment firm, said it would be easier for Xi to carry out his ambitious vision of raising living standards if more power were concentrated in his hands.

"I will definitely support this constitutional amendment and this government. This is a powerful and strong government," Zhao said. He added, however, that he was concerned that the public discourse lacked a space for dissenting voices.

___

Associated Press researchers Fu Ting and Shanshan Wang contributed to this report.

TOKYO (Reuters) - References to Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe, his wife and Finance Minister Taro Aso were removed from documents related to a suspected cronyism scandal, according to the documents seen by Reuters.

FILE PHOTO: Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe and his wife Akie are pictured at Tokyo's Haneda Airport, Japan January 26, 2016. REUTERS/Toru Hanai/File Photo

Questions over the sale of state-owned land at a huge discount to a school operator with ties to Abe’s wife, Akie, have dogged Abe since the matter became public last year.

Abe and his wife have denied any wrongdoing.

Aso told a news conference on Friday that several officials at his ministry’s division in charge of the sale were involved in altering the documents.

He did not say why the documents were altered.

The 77-year-old Aso apologized for his ministry’s actions but said he had no intention to resign.

Japan's Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Taro Aso speaks to reporters in Tokyo, Japan March 12, 2018. REUTERS/Toru Hanai

“It’s extremely regrettable and I apologize for this,” Aso told reporters, when asked whether he felt responsible as head of the ministry involved in the alterations.

Abe, now in his sixth year in office, has repeatedly denied he or his wife did favors for school operator Moritomo Gakuen, which bought the land, and has said he would resign if evidence were found that they had.

FILE PHOTO: Japan's Prime Minister Shinzo Abe (C) talks with Deputy Prime Minister and Finance Minister Taro Aso at the Lower House of the Parliament in Tokyo, Japan, November 1, 2017. REUTERS/Toru Hanai

Suspicions of a cover-up could slash Abe’s ratings and dash his hopes of a third term as leader of the ruling Liberal Democratic Party (LDP). Victory in the LDP September leadership vote would put him on track to become Japan’s longest-serving premier. The matter has also led to opposition calls for Aso, who doubles as deputy premier, to resign.

“The involvement of Mrs. Abe has deepened. This has entered the stage where the responsibility of the prime minister himself will be called into question,” opposition Democratic Party leader Yuichiro Tamaki, was quoted saying by Kyodo news agency.

A finance ministry official said that 14 items had been altered in the documents after February — when the scandal broke - at the instruction of the ministry’s finance division to match testimony in parliament.

Chief Cabinet Secretary Yoshihide Suga on Monday did not directly respond to a question by reporters about Akie Abe but said that the finance minister Aso should investigate the facts.

“What is important is to make everything clear,” he said.

Sherman Alexie Postpones Memoir's Paperback Release Amid Sexual Harassment Claims

The publisher of Sherman Alexie is postponing the release of the paperback edition of the author's memoir about his mother, You Don't Have to Say You Love Me.

Hachette Book Group says it took that step at the writer's request. The decision comes after a number of allegations of sexual harassment have been leveled against the writer, who is perhaps best known for his novel The Absolutely True Diary of a Part-Time Indian.

Hachette says while it was "surprised and troubled" by the allegations, it's encouraged that Alexie "apologized to those he has hurt." The publishing house will keep Alexie's other books in print.

After rumors about his sexual behavior began circulating on the Internet, Alexie issued a statement on his website acknowledging he had "harmed other people," and apologizing"to those whom I have hurt."

NPR spoke with 10 women, including three on the record, who accused the writer of predatory behavior that ranged from inappropriate comments to unwanted sexual advances.

Last month, Alexie had been awarded the American Library Association's Carnegie Medal for his memoir. But on Friday, the ALA said Alexie chose to decline the award. The ALA accepted his decision, saying it will not an award a medal for nonfiction this year.

CLOSE Elon Musk’s tunnel project has been moving forward. The Boring Company intends to build an underground hyperloop between New York and Washington. Buzz60

SpaceX founder Elon Musk says he's "very proud" of their latest launch of the Falcon Heavy. The rocket lifted a $100,000 Tesla Roadster into Space with a mannequin named "Starman" in the driver's seat. (Photo: SpaceEx)

Mars spaceships will be ready for short flights by the first half of next year, predicts Elon Musk. The SpaceX and Tesla CEO was taking questions during an on-stage appearance at the SXSW conference in Austin. Musk did fudge on this prediction a little bit by conceding that his timelines can be optimistic.

More: Elon Musk successfully launched his Tesla into orbit on SpaceX's Falcon Heavy rocket

More: Elon Musk at SXSW: `There need to be things that inspire you.'

More: Elon Musk opts for pedestrians over cars in new Boring Company video

Of course, it was only last month that SpaceX launched the Falcon Heavy rocket with a payload that included Musk’s cherry-red Tesla convertible.

“In the short-term, Mars is really about getting the spaceship built,” an effort that has begun, Musk says. That will prove to other companies and countries that it can be done, providing the impetus for them to go and do it themselves.

“They currently don’t think it’s possible, so if we show them that it is, they’ll up their game and build interplanetary transport vehicles, as well,” he says.

From there, Musk says, “a tremendous amount of entrepreneurial resources (will be) needed. because you have to build out the entire base of industry, everything that allows human civilization to exist.”

That will be hard in places like Mars or the moon, he says, pointing out that such celestial outposts will not become an “escape hatch for rich people” but rather require those with a frontier mentality.

“For the early people that go to Mars, it will be far more dangerous. It kind of reads like (Ernest) Shackleton’s ad for Antarctic explorers: Difficult, dangerous, good chance you’ll die. Excitement for those who survive.”

Musk was asked what he thinks the futuristic first Martian colony government might look like. Most likely, it will be some form of a “direct democracy,” he says, in which people vote directly on issues as opposed to going through a representative government.

With that in mind, Musk recommends keeping laws short. “Long laws (mean) something suspicious is going on. If the size of the law exceeds the word count of Lord of the Rings, then it’s like something’s wrong. ... It should be easier to remove a law than create one. ... I don’t know what the right number is — maybe it’s like 60% to get a law in place, but any number above 40% can remove a law. ... Maybe there should even be some kind of sunset clause so that they just automatically expire unless there is enough of an impetus to keep them around.”

Musk weighed in on several other topics during a wide-ranging discussion.

On who inspires him

Musk joked on stage that he is inspired by Kanye West, drawing laughter from the SXSW audience. He then mentioned Fred Astaire. “You should see my dance moves,” he quipped.

How he approaches business

Musk says he doesn’t rank business or financial opportunities so much as see “things that don’t seem to be working that are important for our life and for the future to be good. If you were to do a risk-adjusted rate of return estimate on various industry opportunities, I would put building rockets and cars pretty much at the bottom of the list. They would have to be the dumbest things to do.”

“In the case of SpaceX, I just kept wondering why we were not making progress towards sending people to Mars. Why we didn’t have a base on the moon? Where are the space hotels that were promised in (2001: A Space Odyssey) the movie? It just wasn’t happening. Year after year, it was getting me down. ... The genesis of SpaceX was not to create a company but really how do we get NASA’s budget to be bigger.”

Meanwhile, in the history of the auto industry the only two companies that never have gone bankrupt or were failing and got acquired are Ford and Tesla, Musk says.

“I gave basically both SpaceX and Tesla from the beginning probably less than 10% of (being) likely to succeed.” He says he wouldn’t even let friends invest in SpaceX in the early days because he figured they would lose their money.

“We almost did die at SpaceX,” he recalls.

Musk said he had about $180 million from PayPal and thought he could allocate half of that sum to SpaceX, Tesla and another of his companies, SolarCity. He eventually realized that he had to put pretty much all of his money in “or the companies are going to die.”

That period around 2008 was a rough patch for Musk. He borrowed rent money from friends, had gotten divorced, SpaceX had the third consecutive failure of its Falcon rocket, and Tesla almost went bankrupt. "We closed our financing 6 p.m. Christmas Eve 2008, the last hour of the last day that it was possible."

His experience largely explains why others haven't followed his path. “What’s your pain threshold?” he asked. “SpaceX is alive by the skin of its teeth. So is Tesla. If things had just gone a little bit the other way, both companies would be dead.”

Musk says for all the drama of SpaceX, Tesla is even more of a “drama magnet.” He says he spends most of his business time on SpaceX and Tesla, and people misunderstand that he doesn’t invest in things. “The only public security I own of any kind is Tesla.”

Falcon Heavy lifts off from Kennedy Space Center. (Photo: CRAIG BAILEY, FLORIDA TODAY via USA TODAY NETWORK)

On the Boring Company, which focuses on drilling tunnels beneath major urban centers

“That kind of started more as a joke because I thought that would be a funny name for a company. ... After four or five years of begging people to build tunnels, and still no tunnels, it was like, `OK, I’m going to build a tunnel.’”

Musk says the Boring Company accounts for 2% of his time but 20% of his tweets. “Tweets do not correlated to actual time spent. I just have fun with the Boring Company, but my time allocation is literally about 2%.”

On why he's not high on flying cars

"Do you want all your neighbors having a flying car? This is exactly the question: 'Oh, you want a flying car? How about everyone around you has a flying car, too?' That doesn’t sound so good."

On why artificial intelligence is so scary

“I’m very close to the cutting edge in AI, and it scares the hell out of me. It’s capable of vastly more than almost anyone knows, and the rate of improvement is exponential.”

Musk believes that by the end of next year, self-driving will encompass all modes of driving and be “at least 100(%) to 200% safer than a person.” He says the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration did a study on Tesla’s “relatively primitive” Autopilot 1 and found that it was a 45% reduction in highway accidents, and “that’s despite being version 1.”

But he says that “we have to figure out some way to ensure that the advent of digital superintelligence is one that is symbiotic with humanity. That’s the single biggest existential crisis that we face and the most pressing one.”

How do you deal with that crisis? Musk says he’s not normally an advocate of regulation and oversight. “But this is a case where you have a very serious danger to the public, and therefore ... needs to (have) a public body that has insight and oversight to confirm that everyone is developing AI safely. I think the danger of AI is much greater than the danger of nuclear warheads by a lot. ... Mark my words, AI is far more dangerous than nukes. ... If humanity collectively decides that creating digital superintelligence is the right move, then we should do so very, very carefully. This is the most important thing that we can possibly do.”

Email: ebaig@usatoday.com; Follow USA TODAY Personal Tech Columnist on Twitter @edbaig

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2p7ktFA

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption A passer-by filmed as a helicopter crashed into the East River in New York

At least two people have died after helicopter went down in the East River of New York City on Sunday.

Three passengers are in a critical condition in hospital after being pulled out of the water by rescue divers, said city police.

The New York City fire department said the pilot managed to free himself.

Authorities confirmed it was carrying six people involved in a photo shoot, before it hit the water near Roosevelt Island at 19:00 local time (23:00 GMT).

The helicopter was owned by a tourism group, but police commissioner James O'Neill told reporters it had been privately leased by the group of photographers.

Video posted on social media showed a red helicopter appearing to make a semi-controlled descent before landing with some force in the water. It then began to tip over, its rotors still spinning and slicing into the water.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Divers from the emergency services rescued three people from the water

At a press conference, New York Fire Commissioner Daniel Nigro called it a "great tragedy".

"We are told the five people were all tied tightly in harnesses that had to be cut and removed," he said.

"It took a while for the divers to get these people out. They worked very quickly, as fast as they could. That's 50ft[15m] of water there," he said, adding that they also had to work against currents and water temperatures of below 4C.

Journalists at the scene reported seeing CPR being performed on the rescued passengers as they were rushed to ambulances.

The Federal Aviation Authority said it was investigating the incident.

The National Transportation Safety Board would determine the cause, it added.

At least two people were killed and three were in critical condition Sunday night after a helicopter with six people aboard crashed in New York City's East River, officials said.

The chopper's pilot managed to free himself, while two people were declared dead at the scene of the crash, NYPD Commissioner James O'Neill said at a news conference. Rescuers pulled three other people from the water and rushed them to nearby hospitals.

Two of the critical victims were sent to New York's Bellevue Hospital with no heartbeat and were not expected to survive, a source told Fox News. The third critical victim was rushed to NYU Langone Hospital.

The group, which officials said was flying as part of a Liberty Helicopters tour, was on the private Eurocopter AS350 for a photo shoot when it crashed around 7 p.m. Officials said the water Sunday night was frigid, with temperatures below 40 degrees.

It was not immediately clear what caused the crash, but the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB) and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) planned to investigate.

FDNY Commissioner Daniel Nigro said rescue divers pulled five people — who were tightly harnessed inside — from the chopper, which was "upside down and completely submerged."

One witness told the New York Post she watched the crash unfold from her apartment window and "immediately thought someone was in there and not going to live."

“By the time we got out here, we couldn’t see [the helicopter]," Mary Lee told the Post. "It was under water.”

Another witness, Arineh Nazarian, described seeing the helicopter crash while she and others were eating dinner.

"We noticed a red helicopter going full speed towards the water," Nazarian told WABC. "It almost looked very surreal and next thing we know it's approaching the water slowly and then it just completely crashed and then sunk. Immediate reaction was to call 911."

Fox News' Bryan Llenas and Dr. Marc Siegel contributed to this report.

The US state of Florida has passed modest gun restrictions after the Parkland high school shooting that left 17 people dead last month. The bill increases the minimum age to buy a firearm to 21, from 18, imposes a three-day waiting period before a buyer can get a gun, bans the sale of bump stocks - devices that enable semiautomatic rifles to operate like fully automatic ones, and allows the arming of some school employees.

Meanwhile, in Washington, there appears to be little appetite for new gun laws.

Al Jazeera's John Hendren reports on the "gun show loopholes" from Dale City, Virginia.

Politicians in the Florida House have passed a school safety bill that includes new restrictions on rifle sales and a programme to arm some teachers.

The measure, a response to the shooting at Parkland high school that left 17 dead last month, was supported by the victims' families.

The school safety bill has been sent to Florida's Governor Rick Scott for his signature. If he signs it, the bill becomes law within 15 days.

The proposals include raising the minimum age for buying rifles from 18 to 21.

Al Jazeera's Andy Gallacher reports from Tallahassee, Florida.

(CNN) Thirty-nine people, including military personnel, were killed when a Russian transport plane crashed Tuesday while trying to land at Hmeimin air base in northwest Syria, Russian state media reported.

All 33 passengers and six crew members were killed in the crash, state-run RIA-Novosti reported, citing the Defense Ministry. Earlier, it had been reported that 32 people had died.

Russian President Vladimir Putin was briefed on the incident by Defense Minister Sergei Shoigu during a working visit to Russia's Sverdlovsk region, the Kremlin said in a statement.

The crash occurred as the Antonov-26 transport plane came down 500 meters (about 550 yards) short of the runway, the Defense Ministry said in a statement quoted by the state-run news agency, Tass.

The ministry said it was investigating the crash, adding that "preliminary data suggests it could be a technical malfunction." It also ruled out the possibility that the plane had been fired upon.

Read More



Russian President Vladimir Putin speculated Saturday that nearly anyone could have disrupted the 2016 U.S. presidential election. (Alexander Zemlianichenko/AP)

Jewish groups and U.S. lawmakers condemned Russian President Vladimir Putin’s suggestion that the 2016 U.S. presidential election may have been manipulated by Russian Jews.

Putin’s remarks came during a long and occasionally surreal interview with NBC News on Saturday, in which he speculated that nearly anyone other than the Russian government could have been behind a program to disrupt the election. U.S. intelligence agencies believe Putin ordered the effort to undermine faith in the U.S. election and help elect Donald Trump as president.

“Maybe they’re not even Russians,” Putin told Megyn Kelly, referring to who might have been behind the election interference. “Maybe they’re Ukrainian, Tatars, Jews — just with Russian citizenship.”

[It’s now illegal in Russia to share an image of Putin as a gay clown]

He also speculated that France, Germany or “Asia” might have interfered in the election — or even Russians paid by the U.S. government.

But his remark about Jews, which seemed to suggest that a Russian Jew was not really a Russian, prompted particular outrage among those who remember Russia’s centuries-long history of anti-Semitism and Jewish purges. Some groups compared the statement to anti-Jewish myths that helped inspire the Holocaust.

“Repulsive Putin remark deserves to be denounced, soundly and promptly, by world leaders,” Sen. Richard Blumenthal (D-Conn.) wrote on Twitter. “Why is Trump silent?” Rep. Don Beyer (D-Va.) also demanded a response by Trump, the Israeli newspaper Haaretz reported.

The White House did not immediately respond to a request for comment, and Trump has previously been reluctant to criticize Putin or accept the intelligence community's conclusion that Russia played a role in his election.

[The Putin generation: Young Russians are his biggest fans]

“President Putin bizarrely has resorted to the blame game by pointing the finger at Jews and other minorities in his country,” Anti-Defamation League chief executive Jonathan Greenblatt said in a statement. “It is deeply disturbing to see the Russian president giving new life to classic anti-Semitic stereotypes that have plagued his country for hundreds of years, with a comment that sounds as if it was ripped from the pages of the ‘Protocols of the Elders of Zion.’ ”

The American Jewish Committee also compared Putin’s comments to the “Elders of Zion” — a fabricated document published in Russia in 1903 that claimed Jews were plotting to take over the world and that helped fuel violence against Jews across Europe, eventually influencing Adolf Hitler’s plans for the Holocaust.

Anti-Semitism in Russia goes back hundreds of years. Jews had few rights under the Russian czars, researcher Masha Gessen told NPR.

After the communist revolution, the Soviet Union briefly experimented with creating an autonomous Jewish region along the eastern border, Gessen told NPR. But the zone became the scene of new horrors when Joseph Stalin launched purges of Jews and other minorities — including Crimean Tatars, who Putin said also might have been behind the U.S. election interference.

[Why are Crimean Tatars so hostile to Russia?]

Russian Jews continued to be persecuted even after Stalin’s death. The communists shuttered synagogues, published anti-Semitic books and executed dozens of Jews in the 1960s and 1970s, according to the Jewish Virtual Library.

Nearly every U.S. senator signed a letter urging Putin to help Russia’s Jews after he took power, in the early 2000s. In public, he mostly has. He speaks out against anti-Semitism and Holocaust denialism, and he has invited Jews who fled Russia during Soviet repression to come back.

But some see dark signs in the corners of Putin’s Russia. In January, Haaretz wrote, a pro-Kremlin website published a 5,000-word essay that blamed Jewish groups for chaos around the world — echoing the “Elders of Zion.”

While Putin has portrayed Russia in public as a refuge from far-right and anti-Semitic groups gaining political power across Europe, a report by Democratic Senate staffers accused his government of secretly assisting those same groups as part of its effort to destabilize democracies, according to the Jewish Telegraphic Agency.

The Russian president’s latest remarks have caused particular concern in Israel, a Jewish state that has provided refuge to the victims of anti-Semitic campaigns around the world. Israel has lately been in a diplomatic crisis with Poland, formerly part of the Soviet bloc, after its leader appeared to accuse Jews of helping perpetrate the Holocaust.

In his annual state-of-the-nation address, Russian President Vladimir Putin announced March 1 Russia had successfully tested new nuclear-powered weapons that could avoid any missile defense systems. (Reuters)

CORRECTION: This post initially referred to Poland as a former Soviet state. Poland remained independent after World War II but was part of the Soviet bloc.

Read more:

Polish leader denies being a Holocaust revisionist after blaming ‘Jewish perpetrators’

Elie Wiesel’s great mission on behalf of Soviet Jews

Israel and Poland try to tamp down tensions after Poland’s ‘death camp’ law sparks Israeli outrage

Many local governments in the San Francisco Bay Area have failed to keep tabs on the number of homeless people that have died in the area, according to a report.

The San Francisco Chronicle reported that Alameda County and other local governments in the San Francisco Bay Area do not keep records on the number of homeless people that die per year or their causes of death.

Even if Alameda County collected the data, both the state government and federal government do not require that such data needs to be collected.

The Chronicle investigated several state and federal agencies—including county health departments, coroners’ and medical examiners’ offices, the California Department of Public Health, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)—and found that none had records of homeless deaths.

Of the agencies that do try to keep records of how many homeless people die, they have no guidelines about how they should determine whether someone died homeless.

Even if agencies determine that a person is homeless, that information may never appear on the death certificate, according to the report.

While agencies fail to count the number of deceased homeless people, the number of homeless people in the area has increased by 25 percent over the past two years.

Many local governments in the San Francisco Bay Area have failed to keep tabs on the number of homeless people that have died in the area, according to a report.

The San Francisco Chronicle reported that Alameda County and other local governments in the San Francisco Bay Area do not keep records on the number of homeless people that die per year or their causes of death.

Even if Alameda County collected the data, both the state government and federal government do not require that such data needs to be collected.

The Chronicle investigated several state and federal agencies—including county health departments, coroners’ and medical examiners’ offices, the California Department of Public Health, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS), and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)—and found that none had records of homeless deaths.

Of the agencies that do try to keep records of how many homeless people die, they have no guidelines about how they should determine whether someone died homeless.

Even if agencies determine that a person is homeless, that information may never appear on the death certificate, according to the report.

While agencies fail to count the number of deceased homeless people, the number of homeless people in the area has increased by 25 percent over the past two years.

A mother of two reportedly is suing an English hospital after doctors didn’t realize she was suffering from a life-threatening condition, resulting in multiple limb amputations which she now is calling “a fight for life.”

Magdalena Malec, 31, had both of her legs amputated after contracting sepsis — “the body’s extreme response to an infection” — at the Luton and Dunstable University Hospital in Luton, the South West News Service (SWNS) reported.

She also had her right arm and the fingers on her left hand removed following the situation, which hospital officials reportedly have said could’ve been avoided.

Malec, according to the news service, was told she suffered a miscarriage just weeks after learning she was pregnant with her third child in December 2014.

After being sent home from the emergency room with painkillers for her heavy bleeding and stomach cramps, Malec reportedly returned to Luton and Dunstable later that month, where she discovered she had an ectopic pregnancy — in which a fertilized egg attaches itself to a cavity outside the uterus — and underwent emergency surgery.

Malec, according to reports, also had to have a kidney transplant.

WOMAN LOSES BOTH HANDS, LEGS AFTER SEPSIS BATTLE

During recovery, Malec developed ischemia of her limbs — a lack of blood supply to certain parts of the body, according to SWNS. Her limbs reportedly then developed gangrene and her body tissue died, which Malec said occurred after hospital staff didn’t recognize the warning signs of her sepsis.

Six months later, she had surgery to remove her limbs and returned to the hospital three times a week for dialysis.

“Nothing will restore what I had. I will never paint my nails again, I will never make a ponytail for my daughter,” Malec told The Telegraph. “I do not trust doctors and I am very skeptical about all medical appointments and diagnoses.”

Malec, mother to a nine and seven-year-old, said she now has to relearn how to live her life.

“I am learning how to live with pain. Going out and coping with the way people look at me is very difficult, and so is self-acceptance,” Malec said.

CALIFORNIA GIRL, 12, DIES FROM INFECTION MISDIAGNOSED AS FLU, FAMILY SAYS

The mother’s lawyer, David Thomas, said: “The catastrophic chain of events which led to Malec’s near death and horrendous injuries were completely avoidable if the hospital trust had followed its own sepsis protocol.”

“There were a number of missed opportunities or ‘red flags’ which were not acted upon until it was too late,” Thomas said. “If diagnosed early enough, sepsis is easily treated with antibiotics but despite recent awareness campaigns, mistakes such as this are still happening. It’s tragic.’’

The National Health Service (NHS) reportedly has apologized for missing the warning signs, and acknowledged that Malec’s amputations could’ve been avoided.

“There were missed opportunities to recognize the progressive clinical deterioration of Malec and act accordingly, including the timely administration of antibiotics,” the hospital said, according to SWNS. “We convey our sincere apologies to Malec and we recognize the care provided fell below the standards we strive for.”

Malec since has received in the meantime an “interim payment” — it’s unclear from whom — ahead of her lawsuit.

The US Department of Justice has submitted a regulation that would ban so-called bump stocks, a type of gun modification that increases the rate of fire for semi-automatic rifles.

The proposal, submitted on Saturday, comes after President Donald Trump announced last month that he was in favour of the ban following a mass shooting in Florida.

"President Trump is absolutely committed to ensuring the safety and security of every American and he has directed us to propose a regulation addressing bump stocks," Attorney General Jeff Sessions said in a statement.

"To that end, the Department of Justice has submitted to the Office of Management and Budget a notice of a proposed regulation to clarify that the National Firearms and Gun Control Act defines "machine gun" to include bump stock type devices," he added.

{articleGUID}

Under US law, machine guns are officially banned. However, semi-automatic rifles like the AR-15 are legal because of their lower rate of fire.

Bump stocks use the recoil of the semi-automatic rifle to allow the weapon to fire at a higher rate, effectively turning a semi-automatic into a machine gun.

Saturday's proposal would classify bump stocks as part of a "machine gun", making it illegal to buy or sell them.

The proposal must still be approved by the Office of Management and Budget before it is published and subject to a commentary period. It does not, however, require approval from Congress, where it may have faced opposition due the pro-gun ownership lobby's power.

Las Vegas shooting

Bump stocks were heavily criticised last October after one of the deadliest mass shootings in US history.

The gunman, 64-year-old Stephen Paddock, used the modifications to increase his rate of fire, allowing him to kill 58 people at a concert in Las Vegas.

Although Trump announced in October he would be in favour of the ban, no proposal was ever introduced.

The discussion again gained momentum after a gunman opened fire on a Florida high school last month, killing 17 people.

{articleGUID}

Bump stocks were not used during the Florida shooting, but calls, led by students, for stricter gun control have been heard nationwide.

After February's shooting, Trump said he supported a ban on bump stocks, as well as potentially arming teachers - a proposal that has been criticised by many students and teachers.

On Thursday, state legislators in Florida passed a bill that, among other things, banned bump stocks on a state level.

That state law also raised the minimum age for all gun purchases from 18 to 21.

The bill did not outright ban the sales of AR-15 style assault rifles, which are often used in mass shootings, including both the Florida and Las Vegas shootings. Gun control advocates have long called for such a ban, but so far have not had any success.

Just hours after Florida Governor Scott Pruitt signed the Florida legislation on Friday, the National Rifle Association (NRA) filed a federal lawsuit against the state over the portion of the law that raises the minimum age to buy a firearm.

CLOSE 'O.J. Simpson: The Lost Confession' Executive Producer Terence Wrong discusses the recently found 2006 interview that will air on Fox Sunday night (March 9) AP

'O.J. Simpson: The Lost Confession,' a 2006 interview with the accused but not convicted murderer, airs tonight on Fox. (Photo: Fox)

In an interview that has been under wraps for 12 years, O.J. Simpson offered a "hypothetical" explanation for the 1994 murders of ex-wife Nicole Simpson and Ron Goldman.

Fox aired a two-hour special, O.J. Simpson: The Lost Confession?, in which an interview Simpson did in 2006 with publisher Judith Regan was repackaged and broadcast for the first time Sunday night.

"This is one story the whole world got wrong," Simpson says in the intro.

The program begins with Simpson discussing the history of physical altercations he had with his ex-wife. According to prosecuting attorney Christopher Darden, police had been to their house "multiple times" to respond to domestic disputes.

"Nicole left for us the diary, notes, photographs. She documented the abuse," Darden says in a panel discussion in between segments of the Simpson interview. "My sense is that she knew she was going to die and she wanted to make sure we knew who killed her."

After one particular incident in 1989, Simpson was convicted of spousal abuse after beating Brown so severely that she required hospital treatment.

"The one thing that hurts me as much as anything in this — aside from being considered a murderer — is being a batterer," Simpson says. "Somehow, I came out of all of that because of that night as the poster boy of an abuser."

June 12, 1994

Both O.J. and Nicole Simpson attended a recital for one of their daughters, but afterward he wasn't invited to a group dinner at the Mezzaluna restaurant where waiter Ron Goldman worked.

Simpson, who never took the stand at his criminal trial and has never given an interview about his actions on the night of the murders, describes what happened next -- but only in a "hypothetical" sense.

("He felt if he could claim 'hypothetical' at this point, he would have deniability with the children," Regan says on the panel discussion.)

Simpson says he and a friend named Charlie - who he had known for a few weeks - went to Nicole's house later that evening.

"In the hypothetical, I put on a cap and gloves," he says. He gets a knife from under the seat of his car. "I always kept a knife in that car for the crazies and stuff because you can't travel with a gun."

More: Can O.J. Simpson keep a low profile now that he's out of prison?

More: What's next for O.J. Simpson?

While Simpson was there, Goldman arrived to return a pair of glasses left at the restaurant. The two men argued and Nicole came out of the house because of the commotion. He says Nicole fell and hurt herself.

"At that time, I think Charlie had followed this guy in, to make sure there was no problem, and he brought in the knife," Simpson says.

Moments later, "this guy kind of got into a karate thing, and I said, 'Well, you think you can kick my (expletive)?' " Simpson continues. "I took the knife from Charlie, and to be honest, after that, I don't remember, except I'm standing there and there's all kinda stuff around. Blood and stuff.

"I didn't think any two people could be murdered the way they were without everybody covered in blood. We've all seen the grisly pictures after. Everything was covered in blood."

("I think he's confessed to murder," Darden says during a break in the interview. "I don't think there's any question that he's the person who's wielding the knife. ... This is no hypothetical. This is reality.")

Simpson admits he took off his shoes, pants and shirt and put them in a bundle. "Somebody had to get rid of the bloody clothes," he says.

After leaving Los Angeles for a business trip to Chicago, Simpson returned to a media circus and was questioned by police.

The hardest part?

"It seemed so easy listening to TV that week that it was that easy for people to believe that I could kill two people. I thought my whole life meant something," Simpson says. "It was hard for me to accept that people would believe that."

The Bronco chase

Once Simpson became a suspect and it came time to turn himself in to authorities, he was a no-show. But he left behind a note that addressed his relationship with Nicole: "If we had a problem, it's because I loved her so much."

In the interview, Simpson says he was considering suicide when he disappeared with his friend Al Cowlings in a white Ford Bronco.

TV helicopters found the vehicle and for more than two hours, Cowlings drove Simpson along the freeways around Los Angeles as police gave chase.

"I'm in the back of the truck and I can't believe what I'm seeing. Everytime we go by intersections ... where did these people get the time to make these signs? 'Go O.J.' and stuff," he says. "What was strange is I was being depicted as a fugitive on the radio, but on the sides of the road it was people cheering."

The verdict

Simpson was taken into custody and at the end of a memorable 11-month trial. Simpson was acquitted of double murder in 1995 in what widely was known as the "Trial of the Century."

"I felt that if there was anything right with the universe, there's no way they can convict me of this," he tells Regan. "And we're not talking hypothetical here. That's how I felt."

At the conclusion of the interview Simpson is asked how he thinks he will be remembered.

"Everybody is going to give their opinion. They're going to hypothesize what this book means," he says. "Whatever you want to take from it, I cannot control it. Whichever reason why I did it, you decide. You read it. You decide."

Epilogue

The original 2006 special, If I Did It, was a companion to Simpson's book of the same name, which Regan edited. When the victims' families balked that Simpson would have profited from its airing and several Fox stations and advertisers pulled out, the show was not run. Fox chief Rupert Murdoch later admitted it was "an ill-considered project."

About 45 minutes of the special were screened for media Thursday.

Simpson was convicted in civil court in 1997 and ordered to pay $33 million as part of a wrongful death suit.

Simpson, now 70, was convicted in 2008 on felony charges of armed robbery and kidnapping, but was granted parole and released from a Nevada prison on Oct. 1, 2017.

Follow Gardner on Twitter @SteveAGardner

Image copyright Reuters

The National Rifle Association (NRA) is suing Florida after it passed a gun control law in the wake of a school shooting that left 17 people dead.

Governor Rick Scott, a staunch ally of the gun lobby, enacted the bill, which the NRA says violates the constitution.

The law raises the legal age for buying rifles in Florida, but also allows the training and arming of school staff.

It does not ban semi-automatic rifles like the one used in the 14 February massacre in Parkland.

But it does introduce a three-day waiting period on all gun sales and a ban on bump stocks, a device that enables semi-automatic rifles to fire hundreds of rounds a minute.

The NRA filed its lawsuit on Friday just an hour after the bill was signed by the governor.

One of its arguments is that the legislation violates the rights of young women as they are unlikely to commit violent crime.

What's in the new law?

It raises the minimum age for buying rifles from 18 to 21 in the state - although 18, 19 and 20-year-old police officers and members of the security forces will still be able to buy rifles and shotguns

in the state - although 18, 19 and 20-year-old police officers and members of the security forces will still be able to buy rifles and shotguns It bans bump stocks - devices that raise the firing speed of semi-automatic rifles

- devices that raise the firing speed of semi-automatic rifles It introduces a three-day waiting period on all gun purchases (previously this only applied when people bought handguns)

(previously this only applied when people bought handguns) It makes it easier for police to confiscate weapons and ammunition from people who are deemed to pose a threat of violent behaviour (a measure that has been proposed by five other states in the last month, according to the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence)

from people who are deemed to pose a threat of violent behaviour (a measure that has been proposed by five other states in the last month, according to the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence) It allows school staff to carry guns, with the agreement of their school district authorities and sheriff's department. This is already allowed in the states of Wyoming, South Dakota, Tennessee, Georgia, Kansas and Texas

President Donald Trump has voiced support for arming teachers and so has the NRA.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption America's gun laws explained

Florida Governor Rick Scott, a Republican, signed the bill into law on Friday, after lawmakers at the Florida state level voted in its favour. As he signed it, he said he was an NRA member, and that some members would agree with the new law while others would not.

"It's an example to the entire country that government can and has, moved fast," he said.

Florida's Attorney General Pam Bondi said the changes were "the right thing to do".

"This bill is not perfect, and sadly it will not bring back the 17 lives lost in the horrific school shooting, but the safety of our children is not a political issue," she said.

What does the NRA say in its lawsuit?

The NRA is asking a judge to block the age restriction and prevent the state of Florida from enforcing the new law.

People aged 18 are considered adults "for almost all purposes and certainly for the purposes of the exercise of fundamental constitutional rights", the lawsuit says.

The complaint says the law violates the second amendment of the US constitution, which protects the right to bear arms.

It also argues the bill breaches the 14th amendment's equal protection clause by banning law-abiding citizens between 18-21 from buying guns.

NRA spokesman Chris Cox said the bill "punishes law-abiding gun owners for the criminal acts of a deranged individual".

"Preventing a responsible 20-year-old from purchasing the best tool for self-defence will not stop a deranged criminal intent on committing a crime," the lobby group said.

The legal action says the Florida legislation particularly affects young women.

"Females between the ages of 18 and 21 pose a relatively slight risk of perpetrating a school shooting... or, for that matter, a violent crime of any kind," says the lawsuit.

It also points out that men of 21-24, just outside the new age limit, account for more violent crime arrests than men aged 18-21.

How did we get here?

A former student with a history of mental health issues is accused of killing 14 students and three staff members at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School on 14 February in the second-deadliest US school shooting ever.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Students have been lobbying for greater gun control

The bill's passage by a Republican-controlled legislature in a state where the NRA wields considerable influence is seen as a testament to an impassioned pro-gun control campaign launched by young survivors of the shooting and parents of the victims.

The bill was signed into law in the presence of some Parkland survivors and their families, while some of the student campaigners from the school welcomed it as a good first step.

What reaction has there been?

"How am I not surprised" at the NRA's lawsuit, wrote David Hogg, one of the students from the Parkland school who have turned to campaigning since the shooting.

In California, Democrat state senator Scott Wiener said the NRA's arguments were "astounding" and called the group a "toxic force".

Skip Twitter post by @Scott_Wiener The #NRA - perhaps the most toxic force in U.S. politics - just sued Florida based on the astounding argument that 18 year olds have a constitutional right to buy assault rifles. The NRA is to public safety what climate deniers are to the environment. Time for the NRA to go away. — Scott Wiener (@Scott_Wiener) March 9, 2018 Report

But there were plenty of others who were opposed to the new Florida law.

Newly-released video of a mysterious object streaking over the Atlantic Ocean shows the Pentagon needs to take UFOs seriously, a researcher says.

The sensational two-minute clip captured by a camera aboard a US Navy F/A 18 jet flying at 25,000 feet wowed military personnel.

“What the f— is that thing?” shouted the pilot in the video posted online by the To the Stars Academy of Arts and Science, a private research company.

“Oh my gosh dude!” exclaimed the jet’s weapons systems officer.

The video was shot off the East Coast in 2015. To the Stars Academy did not say how it obtained the declassified footage, but said others could obtain it through a Freedom of Information Act request.

Read more

Democratic Senator Elizabeth Warren stated in an interview Sunday that she is not going to run for president in 2020.

CNN’s Jim Acosta asked, “I have to ask you, because I cover the White House and I hear the president going after you from time to time referring to you as Pocahontas and speaking about your Native American heritage, does that get under your skin when he does that? And do you want to run for president in 2020?”

“I am not running for president in 2020,” Warren said.

She also talked about Trump referring to her as Pocahontas in the same interview, saying, “It’s about my family’s story because my family’s story is deeply apart of me and apart of my brothers.”

Read more

CLOSE SportsPulse: Trysta Krick runs through surprises, snubs and other highlights from Selection Sunday as March Madness officially begins. USA TODAY Sports

Head coach Kermit Davis of the Middle Tennessee Blue Raiders reacts to a call by the officials during the first half of the semi-final game of the Diamond Head Classic against the USC Trojans. (Photo: Darryl Oumi, Getty Images)

Middle Tennessee coach Kermit Davis thinks this year’s team is better than last year’s team that knocked off Minnesota in the first round of the NCAAs and 2016’s team that pulled off perhaps the greatest bracket-buster of all-time in an upset of Michigan State as a No. 15 seed.

“I think we have a Sweet 16 team,” Davis told USA TODAY Sports by phone. “That’s the frustrating part, you know you have a team that’s built for the second-weekend, but you’ve got to get that opportunity.”

THE BRACKET: See all the NCAA tournament matchups | Printable

REGION CAPSULES: East | Midwest | South | West

BIGGEST SNUBS: Seven teams that had strong case to make NCAA field

BRACKET ANALYSIS: Selection committee valued early wins, not late failures

The Blue Raiders, sadly, won’t get the opportunity to play Cinderella again this year, and were one of the first teams left out of the field of 68 as a notable snub on Selection Sunday. MTSU (24-7) lacked marquee wins, but had the most true road wins of any team in the country (12), presented a top-10 non-conference strength of schedule and held a 33 RPI.

Middle Tennessee's Nick King would have been a March star had the Blue Raiders made the NCAAs. (Photo: Jim Brown, USA TODAY Sports)

“We did exactly what the selection committee wanted us to do,” Davis said. “We did everything we possibly could. Of course, we’d like to have more wins (the Blue Raiders lost one-possession games to Auburn, USC and Miami). At our level, it’s trying to be literally perfect. …It is a tough world we live in (as a mid-major conference member). It’s a grind for us because you cannot slip up one bit. You lose just one game to a C-USA team and then all the pundits put us out.”

It was likely the Blue Raiders’ early Conference USA tourney exit to Southern Mississippi, a gigantic résumé stain, that knocked them out of the NCAA field. Two losses to eventual tourney champ Marshall, a team that went down-to-the-wire against Xavier, didn’t help MTSU’s cause but were way less costly. Middle Tennessee had won 11 games in a row and was playing some of its best basketball before losing to Marshall in the regular-season finale on March 3 and Southern Miss. this past week.

“We just had a six-day period where we weren’t playing our best basketball offensively,” Davis said. “It just happened at the wrong time. You hope you can be judged based on an entire season instead of a six-day period by the committee, but unfortunately those two losses (were costly).”

Davis had his team practice on Friday, with the idea that the Blue Raiders would be playing Tuesday regardless — in the NCAAs for a play-in game in Dayton or the NIT as a No. 1 seed for a home game. Unfortunately, it turned out to be the latter.

Here’s a look at six other teams that got snubbed the selection committee this March.

USC came up short in the Pac-12 tourney championship for an auto-bid, and now is NIT-bound. (Photo: Stephen R. Sylvanie, USA TODAY Sports)

Southern California

The biggest head-scratcher of Selection Sunday — outside of Syracuse making the field — is how the Trojans (23-11, 12-6) got snubbed, especially after reaching the Pac-12 tournament final before falling to Arizona. UCLA, which beat the Trojans twice, got in. USC had a 34 RPI. this pick is a testament to the committee paying no attention to conference standings, where USC finished second behind only Arizona and proved to be the second-best team in the league in the tournament in Vegas. The committee instead honored a team that struggled in the Pac 12, Arizona State, based on a pretty non-conference portfolio.

Saint Mary's

Coach Randy Bennett's team has been here before. And once again, a weak schedule is the culprit to a snub. Of the Gaels’ 28 wins, 24 of them came against teams outside the top 100. Just breathe that in. Saint Mary’s (28-5, 16-2) beat Gonzaga but its RPI in the 40s and strength of schedule in the 160s weren't enough to make up for the lack of marquee victories on this deceiving profile.

Heartbreak: Notre Dame, which suffered an injury-plagued season, was the first team out of the field on Sunday. (Photo: Brad Penner, USA TODAY Sports)

Notre Dame

Notre Dame was the team knocked out by Davidson's last-second win against Rhode Island in the Atlantic 10 final, according to the committee chair Bruce Rasmussen — surely a hard pill for this group to swallow. The Fighting Irish (20-14, 8-10) might have needed one more marquee win to punch their ticket and came up short against Duke in the ACC tourney quarterfinals. Coach Mike Krzyzewski said after that game, “I hope they can get in because I think they can beat anybody.” Notre Dame was a completely different team since Bonzie Colson, a preseason All-American, came back from injury. But as lenient as the committee can be to injuries (ND lost seven in a row with Colson out), it still wasn't enough, as it was hard to rationalize Notre Dame’s résumé (RPI in the 60s, non-conference strength of schedule of 170, just two Q1 wins) over some of the at-large candidates that snuck in.

Marquette

The Golden Eagles (19-13, 9-9 Big East) have an RPI in the 50s and non-conference strength of schedule of 137, but the Big East Conference figured to be a saving grace, as it made their overall SoS top-25. There’s no good eye candy on the résumé as far as marquee victories go, but Marquette did have two victories over fellow bubble team Creighton, which squeaked into the field of 68. Did the wrong Big East team get in?

Louisville

The Cardinals (20-13, 9-9 ACC) likely had their season dashed on a buzzer-beating loss to Virginia on March 1. They managed to beat Florida State in the ACC tourney but there’s still not enough meat on this profile (just three top-50 wins). There are no bad losses and an RPI in the 30s to make a serious case, but Louisville just didn’t capitalize on the many Quadrant 1 opportunities it had in the ACC, and that’s something the committee will harp on.

Oklahoma State

The Cowboys (19-14, 8-10) swept Kansas in the regular season — a feat that looks all the more better following the Jayhawks’ impressive Big 12 tournament title and No. 1 NCAA seed status. OSU also has wins over West Virginia and Texas Tech. Ah, the luxuries of playing in the Big 12. But that served as a doubled edged sword that came in the form of a stretch that saw OSU lose seven of 10. That and the rest of the Cowboys’ portfolio is relatively bare. There are no bad losses on this résumé, but no other bubble team had an RPI in the 80s (flirting with the 90s) and a staggeringly ugly non-conference strength of schedule of 295. Baylor also didn't make it from the Big 12, but the Cowboys were ahead of the Bears on USA TODAY Sports' final bracketology.

***

NCAA tourney language explainer

Quadrant 1 wins : Home games vs. 1-30 RPI teams; Neutral-site games vs. 1-50 RPI; Away games vs. 1-75 RPI

: Home games vs. 1-30 RPI teams; Neutral-site games vs. 1-50 RPI; Away games vs. 1-75 RPI Quadrant 2 wins : Home games vs. 31-75 RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 51-100 RPI; Away games vs. 76-135 RPI

: Home games vs. 31-75 RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 51-100 RPI; Away games vs. 76-135 RPI Quadrant 3 wins, losses : Home games vs. 76-160 RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 101-200 RPI; Away games vs. 136-240 RPI

: Home games vs. 76-160 RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 101-200 RPI; Away games vs. 136-240 RPI Quadrant 4 wins, losses: Home games vs. 161-plus RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 201-plus RPI; Away games vs. 241-plus RPI

**

Follow college basketball reporter Scott Gleeson on Twitter @ScottMGleeson.

AUTO BIDS: NCAA TOURNEY-BOUND TEAMS

Diplomacy And Damage Control: Tillerson Tours Africa After Trump's Comments

Secretary of State Rex Tillerson is on a five-country tour of Africa. NPR's Michel Martin asks Linda Thomas Greenfield, the former assistant secretary for African Affairs, about challenges he'll face.

MICHEL MARTIN, HOST:

We're going to begin the program today by focusing on Africa where Secretary of State Rex Tillerson is on a five-nation tour heading to Chad, Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya and Nigeria. Before he left, aides said the themes of the trip are governance and democracy, trade and investment and counterterrorism. Before he left, he laid out his U.S.-Africa strategy this way...

(SOUNDBITE OF ARCHIVED RECORDING)

REX TILLERSON: The United States pursues, develops sustainable growth that bolsters institutions, strengthens rule of law and builds the capacity of African countries to stand on their own two feet.

MARTIN: Over the next few minutes, we'll take on each of these threats and we're going to start with Linda Thomas-Greenfield. She served as ambassador to Liberia and as assistant secretary of state for African affairs under Presidents Obama and Trump.

Ambassador, welcome. Thank you so much for joining us.

LINDA THOMAS-GREENFIELD: Thank you. I'm delighted to be here.

MARTIN: And I think as many people will remember, the last time the U.S.-Africa relationship was very much in the news was when President Trump made his reported, now-infamous derogatory statements about certain African countries. So the question is, is this trip primarily damage control?

THOMAS-GREENFIELD: You know, I think it's a little bit of that, but it's also what the secretary announced, and I would probably put it in a different order. It's security, it's trade and investment and then democracy and governance is a far number three.

MARTIN: Do you have any sense that this administration has defined a posture toward Africa apart from, frankly, these derogatory comments?

THOMAS-GREENFIELD: I think that remains to be seen. I think the fact of the secretary's trip says to all of us that they are trying to make an effort to develop a policy and to reaffirm the relationship with African countries. They realize that Africa matters one year into the administration, and they realize that they have to engage with Africa. So I think that's a positive thing, but I do think they are still working to develop a coherent policy.

MARTIN: Has anybody even been nominated to replace you as assistant secretary of state?

THOMAS-GREENFIELD: I don't think anyone has been nominated. I did hear a name on the news last week - Tibor Nagy, who I know quite well - and we were very pleased to hear that, finally, there's a name out there.

MARTIN: But what does that say, though?

THOMAS-GREENFIELD: You know, I think it says that, for this administration, Africa was not important.

MARTIN: This visit is occurring just weeks after another mass kidnapping of schoolgirls by this insurgent group Boko Haram of which we've heard so much. He's also visiting Chad which is one of the countries included in the president's travel ban. What is the secretary of state hoping to accomplish in terms of counterterrorism by visiting? I mean, what kinds of conversations will they be having?

THOMAS-GREENFIELD: You know, I think, in Nigeria, they certainly will be having discussions about how the U.S. can be more engaged with the Nigerians. During the Obama administration, we had discussed providing military equipment that never came forward. I suspect that the Nigerians will bring that issue up, and they will look for ways that we can cooperate more in helping them to address the threat of Boko Haram, and I hope that they talk about the most recent kidnapping of these girls. A hundred young girls, in school, kidnapped - that's a huge, huge story, and I heard very little in the press about it.

MARTIN: Before we let you go, is a trip like this helpful even if he seems to be rather thinly staffed, even if the programs that he is touting are slated for drastic cuts under this administration's budget? I mean, does that - just the trip itself make a difference?

THOMAS-GREENFIELD: The trip does make a difference. If you've seen some of the readouts from his stop in Kenya and his stop in in Ethiopia, they've been very, very positive. And I think that, again, it sends a message to these key partners that the United States cares.

MARTIN: That's Linda Thomas-Greenfield. She served as ambassador to Liberia and as assistant secretary of state for African affairs under Presidents Obama and Trump, serving until 2017.

Ambassador, thank you so much for being here.

THOMAS-GREENFIELD: Thank you very much.

Copyright © 2018 NPR. All rights reserved. Visit our website terms of use and permissions pages at www.npr.org for further information.

NPR transcripts are created on a rush deadline by Verb8tm, Inc., an NPR contractor, and produced using a proprietary transcription process developed with NPR. This text may not be in its final form and may be updated or revised in the future. Accuracy and availability may vary. The authoritative record of NPR’s programming is the audio record.

If Conor Lamb wins his Pennsylvania special election on Tuesday, his campaign could be a blueprint for Democrats around the country trying to win in conservative districts.

Donald Trump says he doesn’t want to meet Conor Lamb, because the Democrat is saying all kinds of good things about what Trump is doing. “I might like him,” the president told a crowd in Moon, Pennsylvania, at a Saturday night rally for Rick Saccone, Lamb’s Republican opponent in Tuesday’s special House election. “And then Rick is going to be very angry with me.” In this union-heavy, blue-collar district just outside of Pittsburgh where Trump won by 19 points, Lamb is running as a Republican’s Democrat. And some in his party hope his campaign will prove a blueprint for how Democrats can win back the working-class voters who deserted them in 2016. Lamb opposes any kind of assault weapon ban, a stance he reiterated in the aftermath of last month’s Parkland school shooting. In one of his campaign ads, he aims an AR-15. He says he is personally anti–abortion rights, though he would oppose 20-week abortion ban legislation. He supports Trump’s tariffs. He will not back Nancy Pelosi for House Democratic leader. And on Tuesday, Lamb, a former Marine and federal prosecutor, might become the first Democrat to win this district in 15 years. Public polling shows the race as a toss-up; many closely watching the race — including some Republicans — give Lamb the edge. “I think you’re really starting to see how that can be a message that keeps us very competitive in some red seats,” said Rep. Tim Ryan, pointing to Lamb’s focus on “bread-and-butter economic issues” as opposed to the usual political flashpoints. Ryan, an Ohio Democrat who unsuccessfully challenged Pelosi as leader, has spent the aftermath of 2016 on a soapbox talking about what Democrats need to do to win back the white, working-class voters that make up a large portion of this district. He campaigned with Lamb Thursday.

In the fight for control of the House of Representatives, Tuesday’s special election is meaningless. The winner of the $12 million contest will serve for just nine months. A recent court ruling on Pennsylvania redistricting, which for the moment remains in legal limbo, dissolved the district, splitting it into two newly configured districts. When a new Congress convenes in 2019, the district will likely no longer exist. Democrats need to net 24 seats in November to gain control of the House. The most obvious targets are the 23 districts that voted for Republican representatives and Hillary Clinton in 2016. But few people on either side of the aisle expect Democrats to sweep all of those, and even if they did, they’d still be a seat short. Democrats have focused, in large part, on suburban districts where Trump won only narrowly. If Lamb wins in a Republican-heavy district, it would suggest they might have more routes to 24 than they previously thought. Some Democrats credit Lamb for deftly navigating what has been a potent attack against other Democrats: attacks tying him to Pelosi, who is unpopular in this district. In the last multimillion-dollar House special election, Republicans used Pelosi to help sink Democrat Jon Ossoff in Georgia. Some Democrats running this year have declined to engage on the question of Pelosi’s leadership in much more Democrat-friendly districts than this one, deeming it a question they can’t possibly answer before they’re elected or without seeing the other options.

Advertisement

When Lamb came out in early January and said he would not back Pelosi, the Pittsburgh Post-Gazette noted that “such questions may seem premature.” But Democrats suspect it has helped Lamb rebuff Republican efforts to paint him — as they did Ossoff — as nothing more than a vessel for Democratic interests. “What he was really doing was trying to send a message to moderate voters that he’s a different kind of Democrat,” said Mike DeVanney, a Pittsburgh-based Republican consultant who worked for former Rep. Tim Murphy, the Republican who held the seat until resigning in October. “That’s really what this race has been litigated on: Is Conor Lamb a moderate who will work across the aisle? Or is he a closet liberal?” DeVanney told BuzzFeed News. Of course, it hasn’t done anything to deter Republicans from linking him to Pelosi. “Nancy Pelosi — you can't have that,” Trump said at Saturday’s rally. “Lamb the sham,” Trump dubbed him. “He’s trying to act like a Republican [but] he won’t give me one vote.” As of a week before the election, two different Republican groups were on the air with ads tying Lamb to Pelosi. “I think the question voters are going to determine is how effective is that argument,” said DeVanney. “The idea that you can run against the House Democratic leader when Republicans are in charge of the White House, the Senate, and the House, is an impossible task,” Drew Hammill, Pelosi’s deputy chief of staff, told BuzzFeed News. “And it shows just how desperate they are.” Ryan and Rep. Seth Moulton, who has also called for a new House Democratic leader, credit Lamb for answering a Democrat-specific hit with a rejection of politics as usual, a message that can resonate on both sides.

“I think most people look at Washington as being broken, and I think him coming out and saying that he wants to move in another direction is kind of reflective of where a lot of people in the country are, with both our leadership and Paul Ryan’s leadership,” said Ryan. “If we’re going to change Washington, then we can’t just bash Republicans. We need to look at ourselves in the mirror,” Moulton, a Massachusetts Democrat, told BuzzFeed News. Tim Waters, director of the political program for United Steelworkers, said Democrats have recently failed at messaging in these types of areas. “It’s a consultant-driven message of really ignoring working-class voters and focusing on other constituencies, to the point where the party had the same message in Phoenix as they had in Pittsburgh. They weren’t understanding the district,” Waters told BuzzFeed News. “And it was a losing message.” “I hope after 2016 that they learned that lesson — because it was a very expensive lesson to learn,” he added. The United Steelworkers, along with the several of the major unions in the area, are enthusiastically backing Lamb; they’re knocking doors, and on Friday held what turned out to be a 300-person rally for him. If Lamb pulls it off on Tuesday ­— an uncertain prospect, despite Democratic optimism ­— some Republicans say it may prove a moment for Republicans to “recalibrate” their own 2018 message, as DeVanney put it.

“My instinct is this is a real acid test on the durability of the Trump coalition, and also the ability of Republicans to reach out to and hold working-class voters,” said former GOP Rep. Phil English, who represented Erie, Pennsylvania — a little more than 100 miles north. “I think in the end if Saccone doesn’t win, the National Republican Congressional Committee is going to have to reexamine its playbook,” he said. National Republicans, preempting a potential loss, have trashed Saccone, a state legislator and Air Force vet, to reporters in the race’s final weeks. They say he was a bad candidate, and even the millions of dollars they put in couldn’t save him. Democrats, meanwhile, are excitedly watching a race where their candidate should never have had a shot in a normal moment. The Democratic National Committee meeting in Washington, DC, this week was buzzing over the election, said Nancy Patton Mills, chair of the Democratic Party in Allegheny County, the part of the district with the most Democratic votes. “This could be the bellwether,” she said. “It could be the beginning of a blue wave.” “I think giving candidates some freedom to be who they need to be to win these races, you know, this race shows that Democrats can win if the candidate fits the district, even some of the tougher districts in the country,” said Mike Mikus, a Pittsburgh-based Democratic consultant. “I think if Conor Lamb is able to win, this will expand the map with showing that just because Hillary Clinton didn’t win a district doesn’t mean it should be written off, if you have a strong candidate and a strong message,” Mikus added. The question is whether the Lamb model, if it is successful, will prove replicable.

As a special election, more money and interest have followed this contest than a normal House race on the ballot in November. Lamb has benefited financially from the outsized enthusiasm on the left, while Saccone has struggled to raise money, much to the chagrin of national Republicans. “It’s the perfect storm,” said Bracken Burns, a former Washington County commissioner and a Democrat. The fact that it was a special election also meant that Lamb didn’t have to run in a primary — he was chosen to be the nominee at a convention — sparing him from competing against other Democrats in a year when “moderate” has become a dirty word in some parts of the Democratic Party. If the new congressional map for the state goes into effect in its current form, Lamb could test the limits of the theory. If he wins, he would likely find himself in a district that looks more like a swing district, and might well face other Democrats in a May primary. As Trump said Saturday, “It’s a crazy time out there.”







Advertisement

Advertisement

Advertisement

Alexis Levinson is a reporter with BuzzFeed News and is based in Washington, DC. Contact Alexis Levinson at alexis.levinson@buzzfeed.com. Got a confidential tip? Submit it here.

News moves fast. Keep up with the BuzzFeed News daily email! Sign up Great! You're almost there! Check your inbox and confirm your subscription now!

CLOSE Take a trip back to your younger days with one of the nation's best-known retail chains. USA TODAY

(FILES) This November 24, 2011 file photo shows shoppers as they leave the Toys-R-Us store in Fairfax, Virginia. Regulators fined 10 investment firms a total of $43.5 million for promising positive write-ups on toystore chain Toys"R"Us in exchange for lucrative investment banking business. The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority said the firms "offered favorable research coverage" in 2010 in exchange for a role in an initial public offering of the company. Toys"R"Us subsequently cancelled plans for the IPO. AFP PHOTO / Paul J. RichardsPAUL J. RICHARDS/AFP/Getty Images ORIG FILE ID: 536090987 (Photo: PAUL J. RICHARDS, AFP/Getty Images)

For generations of parents, Toys R Us was the go-to destination to reward a child after scoring the winning soccer goal or to track down the hot plaything for the holidays.

But if the superstore chain doesn't find a buyer or win a last-minute reprieve, Toys R Us is expected to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy liquidation next week. And that means many parents and kids alike will have to head elsewhere.

The truth is, many already have. The original big-box toy seller had in recent years fallen behind Amazon and Walmart when it came to being the top destination for families seeking games and gadgets. And Target has been hard on its heels.

More: Toys R Us timeline: History of the nation's top toy chain

More: Toys R Us preparing for liquidation, sources say

More: How Chapter 7 liquidation works: Toys R Us preps going-out-of-business sales

"The ongoing sales declines at Toys R Us suggest consumers find other options viable,'' says Greg Portell, lead partner in the retail practice of A.T. Kearney, a global strategy and management consulting firm.

Still, the disappearance of Toys R Us, an $11 billion retailer, would be felt.

"Toys R Us is certainly the retailer of choice for a lot of consumers,'' Portell says. "If it happens, this shouldn't be viewed as an inconsequential liquidation. If the typical toy purchase is $100, we are talking about over 100 million purchase occasions that will move. Shoppers will notice.''

Amazon, Walmart and Target, which were already peeling away so many of Toys R Us' shoppers, are likely to become the prime alternatives if Toys R Us completely exits the scene. But it's less clear whether any other retailers can become the sentimental favorite that Toys R Us was for so long.

"Your child had a great report card and you would take them to Toys R Us and get them a gift,'' said Jim Silver, editor of the toy review website TTPM and a veteran toy expert who has followed Toys R Us for more than 30 years. "They had a great soccer match, you take them to Toys R Us. Where are you going to take them to pick out that gift?”

One thing shoppers shouldn't fear is prices spiking if Toys R Us disappears. The store chain has often been more expensive than its rivals. Walmart, Amazon and Target often offered toys at steeper discounts to entice shoppers who would then scoop up their other, higher-priced products in other sections of their stores.

That's not been an option for Toys R Us, what has been known in the retail world as a "category killer" entirely focused as being a one-stop destination for playthings for kids of all ages.

"There is so much competition among other toys retailers,'' says Neil Saunders, managing director of retail consultancy GlobalData. "As most products and brands can be easily compared across retailers, price will remain an important factor in driving . . . loyalty.''

Other players are waiting in the wings. Kohl’s and J.C. Penney have been expanding their toy departments in anticipation of more Toys R Us store closings. Party supply chain Party City, which recently hired former Toys R Us vice president Jamie Uitdenhowen, is also expected to beef up its toy offerings, Silver said.

There's also a chance that a new toy store chain could move to the U.S. from abroad if Toys R Us departs, Silver says.

While new arrivals wouldn't be able to establish a national or global footprint on par with Toys R Us anytime soon, they could carve out niches in local communities or online.

"Similar to the resurgence of local book stores, there are great opportunities for sharply curated local options,'' says Portell. "Consumers enjoy high touch, personal experiences. Local toy stores are increasingly providing that option.''



Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2GgvAV8

The White House announced support Sunday for firearms training for some teachers to protect schools, and has apparently backed off an earlier call by Donald Trump to raise the age individuals can purchase assault-style weapons from 18 to 21, The Washington Post and Wall Street Journal reported.

The series of proposals generally fall in line with what the National Rifle Association supports in the wake of the massacre last month at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School that killed 17 people.

The nation’s largest teachers lobby, the National Education Association, is adamantly opposed to Trump and the NRA’s controversial initiative to arm teachers. An armed teacher in Georgia last month fired his handgun after he barricaded himself in a high school classroom, where he was eventually arrested by police. NRA CEO Wayne LaPierre touted arming teachers just last month in a speech before the Conservative Political Action Conference. The White House plan would involve funding to provide weapons training for teachers.

Trump’s apparent reversal from proposing to raise the age young people can buy military assault-style weapons like the AR-15 that was used in the Parkland school shooting is a startling turnaround. It comes just weeks after he taunted legislators, saying that they were “afraid of the NRA,” while he was not. Trump specifically asked Sen. Pat Toomey (R-Penn.) if the senator had left raising the minimum age for gun purchases out of his bill strengthening background checks because senators “are afraid of the NRA.”

Last month Trump said in a meeting with legislators: “Now, this is not a popular thing to say, in terms of the NRA. But I’m saying it anyway. You can’t buy [a handgun until] until you’re 21. But you can buy the kind of weapon used in the school shooting at 18. I think it’s something you have to think about.”

On Friday, Florida Republican Gov. Rick Scott — a long-time NRA member — signed a bill into law raising the minimum age for all gun purchase from 18 to 21. But the NRA almost immediately sued to block the law and protect the “constitutional rights” of wanna-be gun buyers under the age of 21. The state’s controversial “guardian program” — opposed by the Florida Education Association — will allow some school employees and teachers to carry handguns with law enforcement training if a school district agrees to participate in the program.

The White House guns plan also includes support for a bill, known as the “Fix NICS” measure, designed to improve background checks for gun purchases. But it does not contain universal background checks, which would be far more effective.

“Fix NICS” is a bill sponsored by Sens. John Cornyn (R-Texas) and Chris Murphy (D-Conn.) to bolster the National Instant Criminal Background Check System (NICS) by improving the flow of information into it from states and various federal agencies. But what it calls for is far less ambitious than universal background checks, which would include private sales, such as those that often occur at gun shows.

The White House announced that the president is establishing a Federal Commission on School Safety, to be chaired by Education Secretary Betsy DeVos, that will explore possible solutions to school shootings. It may consider the age young people can purchase guns, the Post reported. But nothing in the current White House proposals addresses raising the minimum age for buyers.

DeVos called the proposals a “pragmatic plan” to increase school safety, the Post reported.

Several Democrats slammed the proposals. “This plan is weak on security and an insult to the victims of gun violence,” Sen. Robert P. Casey Jr. (D-Pa.) said in a statement. “When it comes to keeping our families safe, it’s clear that President Trump and Congressional Republicans are all talk and no action.”

How US school shooting survivors spar with gun rights activists on air and online. Plus, media strangled in Eritrea.

On The Listening Post this week: After yet another school shooting in the US, student survivors spar with pro-gun ownership activists on air and online. Plus, media strangled in Eritrea.

#NeverAgain: Aftermath of the Florida school shooting

Sometimes it's worth waiting for a story to play out and then examining what's been reported in the aftermath. The Florida school shooting, which happened three weeks ago, is one of those cases. Seventeen were killed in the attack, 14 of them students.

Unlike some previous school shootings in the US, these survivors didn't shy away from the cameras - they went looking for them.

The teenagers used the plentiful airtime they got to push for tougher gun control laws. And they found themselves taking on not just politicians, but one of the most potent lobby groups around - the National Rifle Association.

Contributors:

Jaclyn Schildkraut, assistant professor of public justice, State University of New York at Oswego

Alvin Chang, reporter, Vox Media

Emily Witt, writer and journalist

Melissa Ryan, visiting fellow, Media Matters for America

John Ziegler, columnist, Mediaite

On our radar

Richard Gizbert speaks to producer Flo Phillips about the killing of a Slovakian journalist Jan Kuciak who had been investigating organised crime and a call by Egyptian authorities for a boycott of the BBC following a report detailing allegations of disappearances by the state.

Reporting Eritrea from the outside

Freedom of the press is virtually non-existent in Eritrea with state-run media the only news outlets available within its borders.

As a consequence, Eritreans have come to rely on a news outlet operating in exile from France - Radio Erena. The station also offers a lifeline to the 5,000 Eritrean refugees who risk kidnapping and death fleeing the country every month.

The Listening Post's Nic Muirhead reports on Radio Erena, the Eritrean news outlet on the outside, trying to make a difference.

Contributors:

Meron Estefanos, presenter, Radio Erena and Host, Voices of Eritrean Refugees

Abraham Zere, director, Pen Eritrea

Biniam Simon, editor-in-chief, Radio Erena

Source: Al Jazeera News

If we believe gender-based preferences are the main creators of career patterns and success in egalitarian societies, we should see women, not men, at the top of most humanities fields. Girls have scored higher than boys on verbal skills, and apparently have preferred jobs that match those skills, for many decades. And yet, we are not straining to explain the male domination of Washington (78 out of 100 senators; 351 out of 435 representatives), nor do we assume that Shakespeare and Chaucer must have been women because no one who was that much an outlier in literary flair could possibly be male. Philosophy, which clearly requires verbal skills, is the physics of the humanities in its gender ratio (20% female, in academia). But, as Tania Lombrozo, the head of UC Berkeley's Concepts and Cognition Lab, puts it, "the most plausible hypothesis" for the deficit is "implicit and explicit bias."
