
By Henry Nicholls and Alex Fraser

SALISBURY, England (Reuters) - Hundreds of people who visited the Zizzi restaurant or the Mill pub in the English city of Salisbury were told on Sunday to wash their clothes after traces of nerve agent used to attack a former Russian spy last week were found at both sites.

Public Health England said there was no immediate health risk to anyone who may have been in either the restaurant or the pub, but their was a small chance that any of the agent that had come into contact with clothing or belongings could still be present in minute amounts and contaminate skin.

Former double agent Sergei Skripal, 66, and his daughter Yulia, 33, have been in hospital in a critical condition since March 4, when they were found unconscious on a bench in the southern English cathedral city of Salisbury.

"We have now learned there has been some trace contamination by the nerve agent in both the Mill pub and Zizzi restaurant in Salisbury," chief medical offer Sally Davies said on Sunday.

She said she was confident that no one who was in the restaurant or the pub on March 4 or 5 had been harmed, but their clothing should be washed and personal items like phones wiped as a precaution against any long-term exposure to any substance.

Skripal and his daughter remained in a "critical but stable condition in intensive care," the chief executive of the local hospital said at a news conference.

A police officer who initially responded was "conscious and in a serious but stable condition," she added.

British police have said a nerve agent was used against Skripal and his daughter, but have not made public which one.

SMALL RISK

Public Health England said it had weighed new evidence before issuing its advice on Sunday, and it said the general public had not been at risk in the days since the attack.

"This is about a very, very small risk of repetitive contact for any traces of contamination that people may have taken out," Public Health England's deputy medical director Jenny Harries said at the same press conference.

"In risk terms one or two days is not what we are concerned about, what we are worrying about is whether there could be an ongoing risk that could build over the future."

Cordons were still around the restaurant and the pub on Sunday, and police could not say how long they would remain.

A number of police cars and other vehicles were removed from a local car park by soldiers wearing protective clothing and gas masks on Sunday, a Reuters eyewitness said.

Items from the Zizzi restaurant, including a table, had been removed and destroyed, the BBC said.

Local residents said they were concerned by the warnings about contamination issued to the people who had visited the venues.

"It's worried a lot of people," dog walker Phil Burt said. "This town is usually packed on a Sunday, but I think a lot of people are just staying away."

Many in British media and politics have speculated that Russia could have played a part in the attack on Skripal, but interior minister Amber Rudd said on Saturday it was too early to say who was responsible.

Skripal betrayed dozens of Russian agents to British intelligence before his arrest in Moscow in 2004. He was sentenced to 13 years in prison in 2006, and in 2010 was given refuge in Britain after being exchanged for Russian spies.

Finance minister Philip Hammond said Britain would respond "appropriately" if a foreign state is found to have been involved in the poisoning.

"This is a police investigation and it will be evidence-led and we must go where the evidence takes us," Hammond told BBC television on Sunday.

"So we have to allow the police investigation to run its course. But if there were to be an involvement of a foreign state evidenced by this investigation, then obviously that would be very serious indeed and the government would respond appropriately," he said.

(Reporting by Paul Sandle and William Schomberg; Editing by Mark Potter and David Evans)

If we believe gender-based preferences are the main creators of career patterns and success in egalitarian societies, we should see women, not men, at the top of most humanities fields. Girls have scored higher than boys on verbal skills, and apparently have preferred jobs that match those skills, for many decades. And yet, we are not straining to explain the male domination of Washington (78 out of 100 senators; 351 out of 435 representatives), nor do we assume that Shakespeare and Chaucer must have been women because no one who was that much an outlier in literary flair could possibly be male. Philosophy, which clearly requires verbal skills, is the physics of the humanities in its gender ratio (20% female, in academia). But, as Tania Lombrozo, the head of UC Berkeley's Concepts and Cognition Lab, puts it, "the most plausible hypothesis" for the deficit is "implicit and explicit bias."

TOKYO (Reuters) - Termite exterminators working on a house renovation in the Japanese capital uncovered the bodies of several babies preserved in bottles, some with umbilical cords still attached, Kyodo news agency said on Monday.

Three or four such bottles were found beneath the floor of a house abandoned for the past three years, where an obstetrician had once lived and which was being renovated by a recent purchaser, Kyodo added.

The bodies appeared to have been preserved in a substance resembling formalin, Kyodo said, adding that police were investigating further.

Police declined to confirm the report.

Leftists finally think (erroneously) they have a game-changing incident involving a Border Patrol apprehension of an illegal immigrant.

A week ago, Perla Morales-Luna was arrested in front of her crying daughters in National City, California. Someone videotaped the incident. The video has gone viral. What most early press reports failed to note, or buried deep in their stories, is that the woman refused to be taken peacefully and in private. One unusual exception was a Friday evening Associated Press story.

Here is a sample of related headlines seen at other outlets found in a Google News search at 10 p.m. Eastern Time on Saturday:

Many people who only see these headlines will believe that this was an abusive incident.

The AP story began with the Border Patrol’s reaction. With the exception noted below, it was relatively objective:

[…]”The U.S. Border Patrol said Friday that agents acted appropriately during the videotaped arrest of a woman who was pulled away from her anguished daughters on a street in Southern California.”

[…]“The agency said 36-year-old Perla Morales Luna recruited drivers to take people who crossed the border illegally to a house in National City, near San Diego.”

Read more

This week’s “Saturday Night Live” opened as a spoof of ABC’s “The Bachelor,” featuring Kate McKinnon as FBI special counsel Robert Mueller.

McKinnon’s Mueller confronted the contestant, played by Cecily Strong, to tell her he could not commit to finding President Donald Trump guilty of colluding with the Russians in the 2016 presidential election.

“The reality is that I don’t think I can give you everything that you want right now,” McKinnon said.

“You don’t have Trump on collusion?” Strong’s character asked.

Read more

Image copyright MARK RALSTON Image caption Singer Katy Perry got caught up in a lawsuit involving two nuns and the Los Angeles Archdiocese

A nun embroiled in a property dispute with singer Katy Perry collapsed and died during a court hearing on Friday, US media report.

Sister Catherine Rose Holzman was 89.

She was one of two nuns locked in a legal battle with Perry and the Los Angeles Archdiocese over a former convent in the city.

Perry agreed to buy the property for $14.5m (£10.4m) in 2015, but the deal turned sour when the former residents objected.

Sister Catherine Rose and Sister Rita Callanan said they were uncomfortable handing the convent and its eight surrounding acres over to the star, whose sometimes provocative hits include I Kissed A Girl and Ur So Gay.

Perry reportedly visited the nuns to win them over, and is said to have shown them her tattoo of Jesus and sung a hymn for them. But the pair remained unconvinced.

"I found her videos," Sister Rita Callanan told the Los Angeles Times. "I wasn't happy with any of it."

The nuns instead sold the residence to local restaurant owner Dana Hollister, without the approval of their Archdiocese.

'Please stop'

Perry and the Catholic Church were awarded almost $10m in damages in 2017, when their lawyers successfully argued that the sisters had no right to sell the property.

The nuns had failed to get the consent of Archbishop Jose Gomez and the Vatican, which must approve the sale of any property worth over $7.5m, the advocates said.

A jury then concluded that the restaurateur had deliberately interfered with Perry's planned purchase.

The post-judgement proceedings have been put on hold following the nun's death.

In a statement on Friday, Archbishop Gomez said: "Sister Catherine Rose served the Church with dedication and love for many years, and today we remember her life with gratitude."

More of our most read stories:

Sister Catherine Rose spoke to Fox11 LA hours before her collapse in what may have been her final interview.

She issued a direct plea to the singer, saying: "To Katy Perry, please stop. It's not doing anyone any good except hurting a lot of people."

Seventeen crosses were seen hanging off a gun show billboard in Louisville, Kentucky, on Sunday.

The crosses are intended to represent the 17 fatalities in the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School attack. The Courier Journal reported that the crosses were white and each was emblazoned with the name of one of the shooting victims.

The billboard was located on I-65, and the company that owns it said they would remove the crosses in a matter of hours.

On February 20, Breitbart News reported that a “Kill the NRA” billboard showed up in the same area, along I-65 in Louisville.

The Courier Journal reported that the “Kill the NRA” billboard was tagged with “Resist 45.” It was one of several that appeared in Louisville and leveled some degree of criticism toward President Donald Trump. One billboard urged viewers to “Grab life by the pussy.”

No group has claimed responsibility for the crosses on the gun show billboard.

AWR Hawkins is an award-winning Second Amendment columnist for Breitbart News, the host of the Breitbart podcast Bullets with AWR Hawkins, and the writer/curator of Down Range with AWR Hawkins, a weekly newsletter focused on all things Second Amendment, also for Breitbart News. He is the political analyst for Armed American Radio. Follow him on Twitter: @AWRHawkins. Reach him directly at awrhawkins@breitbart.com. Sign up to get Down Range at breitbart.com/downrange.

Seventeen crosses were seen hanging off a gun show billboard in Louisville, Kentucky, on Sunday.

The crosses are intended to represent the 17 fatalities in the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School attack. The Courier Journal reported that the crosses were white and each was emblazoned with the name of one of the shooting victims.

The billboard was located on I-65, and the company that owns it said they would remove the crosses in a matter of hours.

On February 20, Breitbart News reported that a “Kill the NRA” billboard showed up in the same area, along I-65 in Louisville.

The Courier Journal reported that the “Kill the NRA” billboard was tagged with “Resist 45.” It was one of several that appeared in Louisville and leveled some degree of criticism toward President Donald Trump. One billboard urged viewers to “Grab life by the pussy.”

No group has claimed responsibility for the crosses on the gun show billboard.

AWR Hawkins is an award-winning Second Amendment columnist for Breitbart News, the host of the Breitbart podcast Bullets with AWR Hawkins, and the writer/curator of Down Range with AWR Hawkins, a weekly newsletter focused on all things Second Amendment, also for Breitbart News. He is the political analyst for Armed American Radio. Follow him on Twitter: @AWRHawkins. Reach him directly at awrhawkins@breitbart.com. Sign up to get Down Range at breitbart.com/downrange.

CLOSE When you retire, you don't want to pinch pennies. These are the 10 least tax-friendly states for retirees, according to GOBankingRates. USA TODAY

Sick of having the IRS get its hands on your money? Here’s how to fight back.

Woman using calculator with forms on a clipboard in front of her (Photo: GETTY IMAGES)

Like it or not, there's no getting out of paying taxes. But while it's one thing to lose some of your earnings to the IRS, it's another thing to come away feeling you're getting downright robbed. If your tax bill seems to be going nowhere but up year after year, it could be a sign that you're not being tax-savvy enough. With that in mind, here are a few strategies to utilize if you're tired of having the IRS take too much of your money.

1. Save in a tax-advantaged retirement plan

Many filers think they can't save money on their taxes because they don't itemize. But whether you take the standard deduction or not, here's one tax break you can't afford to give up: retirement plan contributions. When you fund a traditional IRA or 401(k), that money goes in tax-free, and your associated savings become a function of your effective tax rate.

This year, workers under 50 can contribute up to $5,500 to an IRA, and $18,500 to a 401(k). Those 50 or over, meanwhile, get a sizable catch-up that raises these limits to $6,500 and $24,500, respectively. Even if you can't max out, saving in either type of plan is a good way to automatically slash your tax bill. Case in point: If your effective tax rate is 25%, and you put $5,000 into your 401(k) this year, you'll lower your 2018 taxes by $1,250, just like that.

2. Rethink the way you sell investments

The goal of investing is to make money, but unfortunately, the profits you reap aren't all yours to claim. When you invest in a traditional (non-retirement) brokerage account and sell investments at a price that's higher than what you initially paid, you instantly land on the hook for capital gains taxes. But you can lower those taxes if you sell your investments strategically.

Any time you hold an investment for a year and a day before selling it at a profit, you put yourself in the long-term capital gains category. And that's the one you want to be in, because long-term capital gains are taxed at a lower rate than short-term gains, which apply to investments held for a year or less before being sold. Specifically, short-term gains are taxed as ordinary income, whereas long-term gains max out at a 20% rate. Most filers pay just 15% though, and lower earners pay 0%.

So imagine you sell an investment at a $1,000 gain, and that your effective tax rate is 25%. If that gain falls into the short-term category, you'll lose $250 to the IRS. But if you wait long enough to qualify for the long-term capital gains rate, you'll most likely lose just 15%, or $150. That's an instant $100 in savings.

More:Looking ahead to 2018 tax season: 5 ways to hack the new tax law

More:5 pieces of popular tax advice that are actually baloney

More:Tax headaches: Social Security benefits targeted by hackers

3. Be smart about medical expenses

Medical bills are a burden for most Americans, but if you're smart, you can use them to your advantage tax-wise. Specifically, if you keep tabs on your medical spending, you might snag a tax break this year if your total costs surpass 7.5% of your adjusted gross income (AGI). And the expenses you're allowed to count toward that total run the gamut from in-office copays to prescription eyeglasses to travel to and from appointments.

So let's say your AGI is $100,000, and you spend $9,000 on medical care this year. You're allowed to deduct anything in excess of $7,500 -- so in this case, $1,500. And assuming the 25% effective tax rate we've been working with all along, that deduction will put $375 back in your pocket.

Another way to lower your tax burden via medical expenses is to sign up for a flexible spending account, or FSA, which lets you use pre-tax dollars to pay for your healthcare costs. This year, you can contribute up to $2,650 to a healthcare FSA, and if your effective tax rate is 25%, that'll result in $662 in savings, provided you use up your account balance entirely. Keep in mind that if you overfund an FSA and don't rack up enough eligible medical expenses, you risk forfeiting some of your money, so be smart about estimating your out-of-pocket costs for the year.

Losing more money than necessary to taxes is an absolute shame. So don't stay caught in that trap. Follow these tips, and with any luck, the IRS will start getting less of your hard-earned money.

CLOSE 51% of Americans now approve of the tax law. That number is up from 37% in December. Buzz60

The Motley Fool has a disclosure policy.

The Motley Fool is a USA TODAY content partner offering financial news, analysis and commentary designed to help people take control of their financial lives. Its content is produced independently of USA TODAY.

Offer from the Motley Fool: The $16,122 Social Security bonus most retirees completely overlook

If you're like most Americans, you're a few years (or more) behind on your retirement savings. But a handful of little-known "Social Security secrets" could help ensure a boost in your retirement income. For example: one easy trick could pay you as much as $16,122 more... each year! Once you learn how to maximize your Social Security benefits, we think you could retire confidently with the peace of mind we're all after. Simply click here to discover how to learn more about these strategies.

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2Fqdvqj

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Elon Musk says a colony on Mars is a pressing matter to ensure the survival of the human race

Elon Musk, a man prone to ludicrous deadlines, has birthed another: test flights of his Mars spaceship next year.

"I think we’ll be able to do short flights, up and down flights, some time in the first half of next year," he told an audience at the South by South West (SXSW) festival in Austin, Texas.

He said it was vital humans reached the Red Planet before the next "probable" world war.

A Mars colony, he said, would reduce the chance of an extended new Dark Ages if a nuclear conflict was to wipe out life on Earth.

But, aware of his reputation, he added: "Sometimes my timelines are a little... y’know."

Don't automatically assume that the luxuries you were able to buy with the extra money are now off limits. If you traveled more and enjoyed it, for example, that should still have a place in your budget. You could cut elsewhere to make sure travel is part of your life. If some of your spending didn't bring you much joy, though, pay attention to that as well. You may have started eating out more only to find your health suffered, or you didn't enjoy it that much, and you'd be fine doing that less often.

An employee arranges a test tube in a container used to freeze human eggs for in vitro fertilization at a fertility clinic in Greece. (Kostas Tsironis/Bloomberg)

A long-established San Francisco fertility clinic experienced a liquid nitrogen failure in a storage tank holding thousands of frozen eggs and embryos for future use, jeopardizing tissue hundreds of women had stored in hopes of having children.

The March 4 incident at Pacific Fertility Clinic, acknowledged Sunday by the facility’s president, followed a similar malfunction the same weekend at an unrelated clinic in Cleveland, the University Hospitals Fertility Center.

The two episodes carry powerful emotional and financial consequences, and come as the number of women freezing their eggs has soared in recent years. Although individual women have reported having frozen eggs damaged in storage or in transit, a spokesman for the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, a major professional organization, said such large-scale incidents appear to be unprecedented.

“We can’t say definitively nothing like this has ever happened, but we are certainly not aware of anything,” said Sean Tipton, the association’s chief policy, advocacy and development officer. “Now that we have a second incident, it becomes very important that we learn as much as we can about both, to search for commonalities and see if there are . . . risks that have now come to light that need to be addressed.”

Officials at Pacific Fertility said the latest problem was discovered by the clinic’s laboratory director, who noticed during a routine check that the level of liquid nitrogen in one of the clinic’s steel storage tanks had fallen too low. Too little liquid nitrogen causes the temperature in the waist-high tanks to rise, risking damage to tissue housed in vials called cryolocks. Each vial can contain as many as three eggs; embryos — fertilized eggs — are stored individually.

The clinic declined to say how many eggs and embryos had been affected but said the malfunctioning tank, storage tank No. 4, contained “several thousand” eggs and embryos. Clinic spokesman Alden Romney said that represents as much as 15 percent of the total stored at the facility.

In an interview, the clinic’s president, Carl Herbert, said the lab director immediately transferred the threatened eggs and embryos to a spare storage tank brought into the lab and filled with liquid nitrogen. Staff then spent days sorting through records to verify which patients had tissue inside.

On Saturday night, the half-dozen doctors who work at Pacific Fertility were finally able to begin making phone calls to some 400 patients who had all their eggs or embryos stored in storage tank No. 4.

Early Sunday, the clinic sent out emails notifying two other groups: Roughly 100 patients whose tissue was split between tank No. 4 and other tanks, and a larger group whose tissue was unaffected.

Herbert said his discussions with patients were emotional. “Anger is a big part of the phone call,” he said. “Our goal is to provide all the patients we see with some kind of a family. . . . We need to think: If this tissue doesn’t work, what are the next steps, and have you not feel defeated.”

Herbert said the extent of the damage is not yet clear. When clinic staff thawed a few eggs affected by the malfunction, they found that the tissue remained viable. Staff have not checked any of the embryos, he said.

“This was a terrible incident,” Herbert said, “but I was reassured that . . . [staff] did everything anybody could ever want to do.”

The clinic has reported the incident to the College of American Pathologists, which certifies labs, and the overseers of California’s tissue banks, Herbert said. The clinic also has brought in a multidisciplinary team to investigate the malfunctioning tank and, he said, “every aspect that involves cryopreservation.”

Some of the eggs and embryos in tank No. 4 had been in storage for as long as 10 years, Herbert said, though the tank also was still in active use. Herbert said the clinic does not yet know how many affected patients had been planning to use the stored tissue.

According to its website, Pacific Fertility’s fees for egg-freezing start at $8,345 for an initial cycle and $6,995 for subsequent rounds. In each cycle, a patient’s ovaries are stimulated with drugs to produce multiple eggs, which are then harvested by doctors and frozen.

For affected patients who are still eager to use their eggs or embryos to try to become pregnant, Herbert said the clinic plans to first thaw them and check for viability. If the tissue is not viable, he said, “we are going to make our patients happy one way or another.”

Herbert is a longtime physician and researcher in assisted reproductive technology. In 1982, he helped develop one of the nation’s earliest reproductive technology programs at Vanderbilt University Medical Center. He moved to San Francisco in 1990 and, with colleagues, purchased Pacific Fertility Center nine years later.

In the earlier incident in Cleveland, officials at University Hospitals Ahuja Medical Center’s fertility clinic notified about 700 patients that their frozen eggs and embryos may have been damaged. Some had been in storage since the 1980s.

On Thursday, hospital officials said in a statement that they were investigating the incident and that it was unknown whether the cause had been human error or mechanical failure.

Last week, the American Society for Reproductive Medicine issued a statement calling the Cleveland incident a “tragedy.” It said, “First and foremost our hearts go out to the patients who have suffered this loss.”

As assisted reproductive technology has advanced, the services of fertility clinics — and therefore egg- and embryo-freezing — have become increasingly popular. In addition to patients who freeze eggs and embryos while trying to become pregnant, a rapidly growing number of American women are choosing to freeze their eggs as a hedge against later infertility.

The number of egg-freezing patients jumped from 475 in 2009 to 7,518 in 2015, the most recent year for which figures are available from the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology. In total, about 20,000 American women have had their eggs preserved.

In 2016, the American Society for Reproductive Medicine, the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology and the Society for Reproductive Biologists and Technologists developed joint guidance, recommending that all in vitro fertilization programs have a plan to protect the human tissue they keep “in the event of an emergency or natural disaster.”

The emergencies mentioned in the guidance are fires, floods, power failures and terrorist attacks — but do not include instances in which a clinic’s own equipment fails.

Ariana Eunjung Cha contributed to this report.

Read more

The struggle to conceive with frozen eggs.

Five things you need to know if you are considering freezing your eggs.

Discounts, guarantees and the search for ‘good’ genes: How the booming fertility business is changing the American family.

A YEAR ago, then-Homeland Security Secretary John F. Kelly said publicly that his department might separate children from parents caught crossing the border, including those fleeing violence and seeking asylum, as a punitive means of deterring others who might follow. Officials floated the idea again in December, having presented it to Mr. Kelly’s successor, Kirstjen Nielsen. Future families should be aware that “there are consequences to illegal entry,” one official told The Post.

Now, as immigration advocates document such cases occurring nationwide — some said to involve weeping children wrenched from their mothers’ and fathers’ arms — DHS officials profess outrage at suggestions that they would do such a thing “for reasons other than to protect the child.” Claims that the department would be so heartless should be regarded “with the level of skepticism they deserve,” said Tyler Houlton, a spokesman.

So the department stands accused of doing precisely what it said it might do, but assertions that it is actually doing so should be viewed skeptically?

Homeland Security has deployed that tortured logic recently in defending its treatment of a 39-year-old mother and her 7-year-old daughter, asylum seekers who fled Congo, fearing violence. The two presented themselves in November to officials at the border in Southern California, cleared an initial screening interview in which a U.S. official determined that they stood a decent chance of being granted asylum — and, within days, were forcibly separated by immigration agents. The mother, known in court papers as Ms. L., was taken to a detention facility near San Diego; the little girl, known as S.S., who screamed when separated from her parent, was taken to a facility in Chicago.

After the American Civil Liberties Union filed suit last month to reunite the two, DHS officials declined to comment on their case, citing privacy concerns, and insisted that the department does not “currently have a policy of separating women and children.” However, Mr. Houlton said in a statement, the department might sometimes do so, “particularly to protect a child from potential smuggling and trafficking activities.”

Having thereby hinted at Ms. L.’s culpability without actually alleging it — or even, f or four months, testing her DNA or blood to settle any doubts about parentage — the government then released her Tuesday. In court filings, it made no effort to explain the basis on which it doubted that Ms. L. is the girl’s mother. Thus has DHS associated itself with insinuations of guilt without evidence, along with arbitrary detention and release, and professed concern for the welfare of children, while keeping a 7-year-old among strangers. Now the ACLU has broadened its lawsuit to include what it says are hundreds of other cases involving children taken from their asylum-seeking parents.

And what of the little girl, Ms. L.’s daughter? She remains at the facility in Chicago, from which she has been allowed just a handful of telephone conversations with her mother in four months. Ms. L., according to her lawyers, intends to pursue her asylum claim but remains desperate to be reunited with her daughter. Will Ms. Nielsen and her Homeland Security agents continue to traumatize an innocent child, or will they permit the girl to be where she belongs: with her mother?

The Generation Gap in American Politics

Wide and growing divides in views of racial discrimination

Generational differences have long been a factor in U.S. politics. These divisions are now as wide as they have been in decades, with the potential to shape politics well into the future.

From immigration and race to foreign policy and the scope of government, two younger generations, Millennials and Gen Xers, stand apart from the two older cohorts, Baby Boomers and Silents. And on many issues, Millennials continue to have a distinct – and increasingly liberal – outlook.

These differences are reflected in generations’ political preferences. First-year job approval ratings for Donald Trump and his predecessor, Barack Obama, differ markedly across generations. By contrast, there were only slight differences in views of George W. Bush and Bill Clinton during their respective first years in office.

Just 27% of Millennials approve of Trump’s job performance, while 65% disapprove, according to Pew Research Center surveys conducted in Trump’s first year as president. Among Gen Xers, 36% approve and 57% disapprove. In Obama’s first year, 64% of Millennials and 55% of Gen Xers approved of the way the former president was handling his job as president.

Among Boomers and Silents, there is less difference in first-year views of the past two presidents; both groups express more positive views of Trump’s job performance than do Gen Xers or Millennials (46% of Silents approve, as do 44% of Boomers).

These generations were also considerably less likely than Millennials to approve of Obama’s performance early in his presidency: Among Silents, in particular, nearly as many approve of Trump’s job performance as approved of Obama (49%) during his first year in office.

Increased racial and ethnic diversity of younger generational cohorts accounts for some of these generational differences in views of the two recent presidents. Millennials are more than 40% nonwhite, the highest share of any adult generation; by contrast, Silents (and older adults) are 79% white. But even taking the greater diversity of younger generations into account, younger generations – particularly Millennials – express more liberal views on many issues and have stronger Democratic leanings than do older cohorts.

This report examines the attitudes and political values of four living adult generations in the United States, based on data compiled in 2017 and 2018. Pew Research Center defines the Millennial generation as adults born between 1981 and 1996; those born in 1997 and later are considered part of a separate (not yet named) generational cohort. Post-Millennials are not included in this analysis because only a small share are adults. For more on how Pew Research Center defines the Millennial generation and plans for future analyses of post-Millennials, see Defining Generations: Where Millennials end and post-Millennials begin.

Millennials remain the most liberal and Democratic of the adult generations. They continue to be the most likely to identify with the Democratic Party or lean Democratic. In addition, far more Millennials than those in older generational cohorts favor the Democratic candidate in November’s midterm congressional elections.

In fact, in an early test of midterm voting preferences (in January), 62% of Millennial registered voters said they preferred a Democratic candidate for Congress in their district this fall, which is higher than the shares of Millennials expressing support for the Democratic candidate in any midterm dating back to 2006, based on surveys conducted in midterm years.

Generations divide on a range of political attitudes

In some cases, generational differences in political attitudes are not new. In opinions about same-sex marriage, for example, a clear pattern has been evident for more than a decade. Millennials have been (and remain) most supportive of same-sex marriage, followed by Gen Xers, Boomers and Silents.

Yet the size of generational differences has held fairly constant over this period, even as all four cohorts have grown more supportive of gays and lesbians being allowed to marry legally.

On many other issues, however, divisions among generations have grown. In the case of views of racial discrimination, the differences have widened considerably just in the past few years.

Among the public overall, 49% say that black people who can’t get ahead in this country are mostly responsible for their own condition; fewer (41%) say racial discrimination is the main reason why many black people can’t get ahead these days.

However, the percentage saying racial discrimination is the main barrier to blacks’ progress is at its highest point in more than two decades. Between 2016 and 2017, the share pointing to racial discrimination as the main reason many blacks cannot get ahead increased 14 percentage points among Millennials (from 38% to 52%), 11 points among Gen Xers (29% to 40%) and 7 points among Boomers (29% to 36%).

Silents’ views were little changed in this period: About as many Silents say racial discrimination is the main obstacle to black people’s progress today as did so in 2000 (28% now, 30% then).

Among the public overall, nonwhites are more likely than whites to say that racial discrimination is the main factor holding back African Americans. Yet more white Millennials than older whites express this view. Half of white Millennials say racial discrimination is the main reason many blacks are unable to get ahead, which is 15 percentage points or more higher than any older generation of whites (35% of Gen X whites say this).

The pattern of generational differences in political attitudes varies across issues. Overall opinions about whether immigrants do more to strengthen or burden the country have moved in a more positive direction in recent years, though – as with views of racial discrimination – they remain deeply divided along partisan lines.

Since 2015, there have been double-digit increases in the share of each generation saying immigrants strengthen the country. Yet while large majorities of Millennials (79%), Gen Xers (66%) and Boomers (56%) say immigrants do more to strengthen than burden the country, only about half of Silents (47%) say this.

There also are stark generational differences about foreign policy – and whether the United States is superior to other countries in the world.

In 2006, there were only modest generational differences on whether good diplomacy or military strength is the best way to ensure peace. Today, Millennials are by far the most likely among the four generations to express the view that good diplomacy is the best way to ensure peace (77% say this), while Silents are the least likely to say this (43%). Nearly six-in-ten Gen Xers (59%) and about half of Boomers (52%) say peace is best ensured by good diplomacy rather than military strength.

When it comes to opinions about America’s relative standing the world, Millennials and Silents also are far apart, while Boomers and Gen Xers express similar views. While fairly large shares in all generations say the U.S. is among the world’s greatest countries, Silents are the most likely to say the U.S. “stands above” all others (46% express this view), while Millennials are least likely to say this (18%).

However, while generations differ on a number of issues, they agree on some key attitudes. For example, trust in the federal government is about as low among the youngest generation (15% of Millennials say they trust the government almost always or most of the time) as it is among the oldest (18% of Silents) and the two generations in between (17% of Gen Xers, 14% of Boomers).

A portrait of generations’ ideological differences

Since 1994, Pew Research Center has regularly tracked 10 measures covering opinions about the role of government, the environment, societal acceptance of homosexuality, as well as the items on race, immigration and diplomacy described above.

As noted in October, there has been an increase in the share of Americans expressing consistently liberal or mostly liberal views, while the share holding a mix of liberal and conservative views has declined.

In part, this reflects a broad rise in the shares of Americans who say homosexuality should be accepted rather than discouraged, and that immigrants are more a strength than a burden for the country.

Across all four generational cohorts, more express either consistently liberal or mostly liberal opinions across the 10 items than did so six years ago.

Yet Millennials are the only generation in which a majority (57%) holds consistently liberal (25%) or mostly liberal (32%) positions across these measures. Just 12% have consistently or mostly conservative attitudes, the lowest of any generation. Another 31% of Millennials have a mix of conservative and liberal views.

Among Gen Xers and Boomers, larger shares also express consistently or mostly liberal views than have conservative positions. Silents are the only generation in which those with consistently or mostly conservative views (40%) outnumber those with liberal attitudes (28%).

Racial and ethnic diversity and religiosity across generations

Millennials are the most racially and ethnically diverse adult generation in the nation’s history. Yet the next generation stands to be even more diverse.

More than four-in-ten Millennials (currently ages 22 to 37) are Hispanic (21%), African American (13%), Asian (7%) or another race (3%). Among Gen Xers, 39% are nonwhites.

The share of nonwhites falls off considerably among Boomers (28%) and Silents (21%). Among the two oldest generations, more than 70% are white non-Hispanic.

Generational differences are also evident in another key set of demographics – religious identification and religious belief. In Pew Research Center’s 2014 Religious Landscape Study of more than 35,000 adults, nearly nine-in-ten Silents identified with a religion (mainly Christianity), while just one-in-ten were religiously unaffiliated. And among Boomers, more than eight-in-ten identified with a religion, while fewer than one-in-five were religious “nones.” Among Millennials, by contrast, upwards of one-in-three said they were religiously unaffiliated.

And already wide generational divisions in attitudes about whether it is necessary to believe in God in order to be moral and have good values have grown wider in recent years: 62% of Silents say belief in God is necessary for morality, but this view is less commonly held among younger generations – particularly Millennials. Just 29% of Millennials say belief in God is a necessary condition for morality, down from 42% in 2011.

'Love and Marriage in Mumbai'

In honor of Valentine's Day this week, a look at what happens AFTER you get married. Sam talks to PBS reporter and author Liz Flock about her new book, The Heart is a Shifting Sea: Love and Marriage in Mumbai. Liz spent about 10 years following three Indian couples in both love and arranged marriages. In a country that is rapidly changing, how do those changes impact marriage? Email the show at samsanders@npr.org or tweet @NPRItsBeenAMin with your feedback.

Image copyright Jamie Squire/Getty Image caption Richard Callaghan (r) trained Tara Lipinski (c) who went on to win Olympic gold in 1998

A renowned figure skating coach who has mentored Olympic and world champions has been suspended by US Figure Skating, the organisation said.

Richard Callaghan, 72, is barred from any figure skating activities pending a fresh investigation into decades-old allegations of sexual misconduct.

When several male skaters levelled their accusations in the 1990s, the veteran coach "vehemently denied" them.

A watchdog to prevent sexual abuse of athletes will investigate the case.

"US Figure Skating suspended the membership of Richard Callaghan on March 6, 2018, in compliance with the policies and procedures of the US Center for SafeSport," the sport's governing board said in a statement on Friday.

Mr Callaghan told ABC News he had not been officially notified of the suspension. He also declined to speak about the allegations.

SafeSport, established last year, examines complaints of sexual abuse and other mistreatment of athletes.

Craig Maurizi, 56, first made his allegations against Mr Callaghan public in a 1999 New York Times article. He is reported to have recently complained to SafeSport but has declined to confirm this.

Now an Olympic coach himself, Mr Maurizi alleged that the coach engaged in sexually inappropriate behaviour with him when he was 15.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Richard Callaghan (l) coached notable figure skaters including 1996 world champion Todd Eldredge (r)

Mr Maurizi also accused Mr Callaghan of abusing his position of authority to begin a full sexual relationship with him starting when he was 18 years old and continuing for a few years.

US Figure Skating acknowledged it looked into Mr Maurizi's accusations in 1999 but took no action as the alleged wrongdoing dated back to a decade earlier.

Mr Callaghan, known for training Tara Lipinski to an Olympic gold medal in 1998, had been allowed by US Figure Skating to continue coaching.

"Richard Callaghan should not have been coaching for many, many years and this was a chance to end his access to young skaters," Mr Maurizi told USA Today on Friday.

When the veteran coach was approached by ABC News in Florida, he said he was retired and coaching a few times per week. "No one's notified me [of the suspension], I just saw a note on a website somewhere," he said.

When asked about Mr Maurizi's allegations, he said: "That's 19 or 20 years ago. I have nothing to say."

A journey on a caravan of misery Hundreds of thousands of Venezuelans migrated elsewhere in South America last year. Reporter Alexandra Ulmer and photographer Carlos Garcia Rawlins join them in a nearly 5,000-mile bus journey south to Chile.

Charred bodies, wounded soldiers after Congo army victory Discarded military fatigues, boots, trash, a charred corpse inside a smouldering hut: this is all that remains of a Ugandan rebel base in the wake of what the Congolese army says was an important victory.

Parents of Nigeria's abducted girls cherish keepsakes The mundane items belonging to 110 schoolgirls abducted by Boko Haram are the only connection parents have as they wait news of their daughters.

Banishing toxic waste from lifeline river Indonesia's Citarum river, often labelled the world's most polluted, descends past crowded zones of factories and homes that dump a pungent stew of garbage, waste and sewage into its 190-mile stretch.

The Hotel Figueroa is nearly finished with the two-year, top-to-bottom, inside-and-out renovation that has transformed it from a dowdy lodging appealing to budget travelers into a stylish trendsetter for creative sophisticates.

The hotel was built in 1926 as a haven for female travelers. The Los Angeles Times noted that it was “the largest project of its kind to be financed, built, owned, and operated by women.” The hotel’s new redesign channels that legacy into a tribute to women, especially artists.

Now there’s a kind of cozy, warm and welcoming vibe to the place that gives the hotel’s public and private spaces a residential feel that sparks a try-this-at-home impulse.

Our behind-the-scenes tour of the more than $55-million makeover before its recent opening to the public highlighted how designers modernized the 1920s fixer-upper without losing its historic, residential feel. No doubt you can borrow some of their design principles for the place you call home, too.

Add art with a message

An 8-foot-square painting in the lobby sets the tone for artwork throughout the hotel. Santa Monica artist Alison Van Pelt portrayed the hotel’s first managing director, the pioneering aviatrix Maude Bouldin, astride a motorcycle. The lobby’s art gallery features all female artists in a newly acquired permanent collection that emphasizes history and a sense of place.

Embrace the feminine side, boldly

Man caves and boudoirs have their place, but a blend of both welcomes all. The hotel’s feminine feel comes from curvy wing chairs, plump ottomans and button-tufted booths. Assertive but earthy colors such as moss, ochre and chestnut highlight soothing upholstery in plush, touchable velvet, suede and chenille. Plucked-from-nature surfaces show up as marble tabletops, wood floors, slate tile and shower floors of smooth river pebbles.

Bring the light inside

The mirror facing the window helps bring light in a guest room at Hotel Figueroa. Christina House / Los Angeles Times

“Even though the hotel had this unique charm to it, part of the lightness and brightness was lost” over the course of its many renovations, said Christian Schulz, principal of the Santa Monica-based interior design firm Studio Collective. His team restored street-facing windows and repaired and wired skylights for nighttime illumination. “It was important to us to have a street presence on Figueroa,” Schulz said. Now, the former fortress-feeling structure embraces pedestrian life, like a friendly neighbor.

Indoor lighting matters

A guest room at Hotel Figueroa. Christina House / Los Angeles Times

Strategically placed, warm-toned LED lighting bathes guests in a flattering glow. Lights placed variously in the floor, on the wall posts and overhead combine to highlight the best features of guests and decor. Lampshades made of antiqued mirror, frosted glass and alabaster or gold-painted paper further filter the soft illumination.

Usher guests in with style

The building now has two entries — one for “stay,” one for “play,” said hotel developer Bradley Hall, managing partner of Capital Hall Partners, which has invested in the project and its redesign. Weary travelers can transition slowly through the separate guest entry, while also glimpsing the action at the adjacent public bar and lobby.

Engineer for engagement

The bar at Hotel Figueroa. Christina House / Los Angeles Times

The public “play” entry opens into a bar and high-ceilinged lobby, with nary a distracting television screen. Instead, the inviting seating arrangements allow for conversation, communal dining and a kind of approachability. “We want people to create an emotional connection instead of staring at a screen,” said co-owner Jack vanHartesvelt, president of Hartland Hotels, an investor focused on hotel operations.

Emphasize comfort

Though suites have spacious seating areas, even the smallest rooms feel engaging with their mix of linen, leather, velvet and marble. The designers were told to “give the guest rooms the most comfortable beds and make the bathrooms feel special,” Schulz said. Guests get pillow-top mattresses, a snuggly bed throw, crisp linens and a choice of pillows from a 16-item menu. Windows are extra sound-proof and double shades block light.

Make bathrooms memorable

Blue, fig-leaf wallpaper in a guest bathroom at Hotel Figueroa. Christina House / Los Angeles Times

Bathrooms don’t have to be dull to feel soothing. The hotel’s oversize rain shower nozzle adds a spa-like experience. More compelling: a custom, trademarked fig-leaf wallpaper pattern rendered in a signature shade of cerulean. Soft-textured, polished plaster makes the walls look and feel like suede but wear like ceramic tile.

Embrace the variation

After shrinking to 268 guest rooms, nearly 40 floor plans emerged. Schulz and design partner Adam Goldstein united the rooms with a palette of cerulean, soft white, satiny brass and dark wood. Art, books and antiques extend a residential feel.

Respect history

While Hotel Figueroa’s reinvention isn’t a preservation project, it is sort of a rescue. “We’re hoping for a timeless feel, so guests will be able to feel comfortable and grow up with the hotel,” said vanHartesvelt. “We’re stewards of this place,” he said, “but with an opportunity to rehabilitate it and bring it into the future.”

Sadiq Khan, Mayor of London, speaks during Chinese New Year celebrations in London on Feb. 18. (Photo: EPA)

LONDON — London Mayor Sadiq Khan wants Americans to know that his long-running feud with President Trump has a deeper context: Friends fight; it's inevitable.

"The reality is that the United States and the United Kingdom have a very special bond," Khan said Sunday in a phone interview. "And your expectations for your best friend are very different to what you have for an acquaintance or a friend you maybe see only every six months."

Khan, 47, spoke from Austin, ahead of his keynote speech Monday at the South by Southwest conference. He will be the first British politician to give an address at the annual Texas event that celebrates the convergence of the media, film and music industries.

Khan, the first Muslim elected to lead a major Western capital city, will explain in his speech how social media companies, such as Facebook, working with governments can do more to prevent the spread of hate speech and fake news.

"For a start," he said Sunday, "these companies need to take more responsibility for this," saying he regularly receives racist, abusive and illegal tweets.

Yet the mayor's war of words with Trump — spanning Twitter, media interviews and newspaper op-eds — threatens to overshadow Khan's visit to the United States this week.

Trump criticized Khan in June for his response to the London Bridge terrorist attack, saying that Khan was "pathetic" for telling Londoners they had "no reason to be alarmed" over the incident that killed eight people.

And the mayor has called on the British government to cancel Trump's state visit here planned for later this year. The two men have also sparred over Trump's attempts to ban some Muslims from entering the United States.

When Trump claimed in January that he was scrapping a trip to the U.K. because he didn't want to open the new U.S. Embassy in London that he deemed "a "bad deal," Khan responded that Trump "got the message" that Londoners didn't want him there.

Khan is London's third mayor, a role he took up in May 2016. Boris Johnson, his high-profile predecessor, is now British foreign minister in Prime Minister Theresa May's Conservative government. Unlike Johnson, who had a privileged upbringing, went to the best schools in Britain and is a distant relative of Queen Elizabeth II, Khan is an ex-human rights lawyer and son of a Pakistani immigrant bus driver.

Growing up in London, Khan learned to use his fists. He and his brothers were boxers. Khan has said in interviews with the British media that violent racism was a constant risk for him and other ethnic minorities.

And since becoming mayor in 2016, Khan has challenged anti-Muslim rhetoric that has dominated European elections in recent years.

Given his interactions with Trump, Khan has also been willing to challenge the "special relationship" between the U.S. and the U.K. — a term coined by Winston Churchill to describe the close economic, cultural and political ties that emerged between the two countries during Word War II.

"One of the great things about having a special relationship is that you stand shoulder to shoulder in times of adversity and provide assistance and help, but it also means saying to your best mates when you think he or she is wrong," Khan said.





Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2IiJJ4F

FRANKLIN PARK, Ill. (Reuters) - Nestled in an industrial park near the end of the runway of O’Hare International Airport, Metal Box International Inc. should be one of the winners of a little-known trade war over toolboxes.

The glass entranceway to Metal Box InternationalÕs toolbox factory is seen in Franklin Park, Illinois, U.S., February 21, 2018. Picture taken February 21, 2018. REUTERS/Timothy Aeppel

In January, the U.S. International Trade Commission ruled Chinese imports had harmed domestic producers of big tool chests sold in retail stores, prompting the Trump administration to slap anti-subsidy duties of up to 95 percent on Chinese boxes. That could jump far higher later this year, after the administration decides whether to add anti-dumping duties on top of the anti-subsidy charges.

“This is a game changer for us,” said Mitch Liss, one of the owners of the privately held company, who said regaining just a small slice of the Chinese business would make the factory boom.

Metal Box International is one of only two remaining U.S. producers of such boxes. The other is Waterloo Industries, a far larger company recently acquired by Stanley Black & Decker Inc, the global tool producer.

So if retailers were going to start buying American again to avoid the mounting duties, it would almost certainly be visible at this factory.

It hasn’t worked out that way. There was a small uptick after the January ruling, Liss said, but so far no boom in orders. After spending $300,000 on new equipment in a surge of optimism, he put plans to buy additional machines on hold and has not added any new workers.

Meanwhile, the Trump administration’s move last week to crack down on steel and aluminum imports is threatening to boost costs for Metal Box International as well as Stanley Black & Decker, which uses those metals to fashion similar tool chests.

Stanley Black & Decker declined to talk about whether it was seeing any impact on its business from the new toolbox duties, though a spokesman told Reuters the International Trade Commission’s decision could mean “increased volume in the plant, which can translate into growth in U.S. manufacturing jobs.”

A spokesman for Home Depot said he would not discuss the company’s tool chest sourcing “for competitive reasons.”

The current battle over steel and aluminum tariffs underscores the risks and complexity in trade disputes, which often pit America’s love of cheap imports against its desire to protect blue-collar jobs. Winners and losers aren’t always initially clear.

Tariffs on steel and aluminum could help some U.S. workers - United States Steel Corp cited the prospect of tariffs this week as its reason to restart a mill in Illinois, for instance.

For a graphic, click tmsnrt.rs/2Fc94hU

But as a consumer of steel, Liss said the metal tariffs will hurt him but quickly adds that he understands why industries are looking for protection from cheaper imports.

TURNING TO WASHINGTON TO SAVE THE PLANT

Metal Box International had a strong business in tool chests as recently as 2014, when among other models it sold a design to Home Depot with glass on the fronts of the drawers - which made it easier to see which tools were in each compartment. Those were a big seller.

Employees seen working inside the Metal Box International toolbox factory in Franklin Park, Illinois, February 21, 2018. Picture taken February 21, 2018. REUTERS/Timothy Aeppel

But the business quickly faded, he said, as they were displaced by imports that sold to retailers at lower prices than Metal Box International could match. Shipments of boxes fell by half in 2015 and fell again by half in 2016, said Liss.

The company was planning to shut down when Liss heard that his last U.S. competitor, then called Waterloo Industries, was planning to file a trade case. Waterloo coordinated its efforts with Liss, who traveled to Washington to testify against the importers.

The trade case targeted only a slice of the toolbox industry. Small, portable toolboxes were excluded, as were professional-type toolboxes sold by companies such as Snap-On Inc, which market directly to buyers.

Companies have long sought trade protection in Washington, often finding as much success under Republicans as Democrats. The trade dispute process is meant to be bi-partisan, with an equal number of Democrats and Republicans sitting on the International Trade Commission.

But the climate now has shifted decisively in the favor of protection under Trump, especially for old-line industries like steel. The Commerce Department said it launched 82 new investigations into trade cases last year, a 58 percent jump over the year before.

Slideshow (2 Images)

“There is the potential element of companies knowing that they’re dealing with a more sympathetic administration,” which may be prompting more complaints, said Scott Lincicome, a trade expert at the free-market oriented Cato Institute.

The Department of Commerce can do subtle things to help companies succeed in these cases, he noted, like offering better guidance in how to draft complaints. But Lincicome said the number of trade cases were already on the rise before the last election. These things always tend to “come in waves,” he added.

The Metal Box International plant, which employs about 100 people, was building Husky brand tool chests for Home Depot one recent day, with workers clustered around an assembly line inserting drawers into the boxes as they rumbled down the line.

The metal-bending machines Liss bought are already lined up in the middle of the plant, but not yet operational. Ever thrifty, Liss bought the machines from a company that reconditions equipment, rather than splurging on new.

“I bought these for $75,000,” he said. “New, each would cost $250,000.”

Liss said most workers here are unaware how close the plant came to shutting down or how tenuous the situation remains. And even those who do know, like the director of operations Tom St. Germain, tend not to talk about the political atmosphere that seems to be helping U.S. producers like them.

Germain said he likes President Trump, but added that “if he shut his mouth and did his job, he’d be more successful.”

Liss calls St. Germain almost every day to check whether big orders are rolling in.

These are early days, Liss said, so it still might happen. Retailers may have already stocked up on imports as they anticipated the trade ruling in favor of the domestic producers. But this would normally be a busier time, since Father’s Day - along with Black Friday and Christmas - are the highpoints of their annual selling cycle.

Still, each week that passes without a surge of orders adds to his worry and confusion. At the moment, he says “we’re back to being a little stressed out.”

Imagine two families in Mobile, Alabama, trying to buy a home. The households are similar in many ways. They have roughly the same income and employment history. They are seeking to buy similar three-bedroom ranches in comparable, quiet neighborhoods. They both want a loan from the same local bank, and both want to put down a similar, standard down payment. The only difference is that one family is white and the other is black. Today—50 years after the passage of the Fair Housing Act, 40 years after the passage of the Community Reinvestment Act, and a decade after the subprime-loan crisis—that black family would be 5.6 times more likely to be denied a conventional mortgage than that white family, a damning report released last month by the Center for Investigative Reporting found. Redlining and other forms of discriminatory lending practices remain a defining feature of the American housing market, and they have profound consequences in terms of wealth-building, equality, and equity. Yet a technical and mostly overlooked provision of a big piece of financial-regulatory legislation working its way through Congress might make such practices harder to identify, and thus harder for federal regulators to stamp out.

This week, Congress is considering a sweeping and complicated piece of law aimed at helping community and local banks. Its exact provisions are still uncertain, but the law will likely let smaller banks make certain risky investments; exempt certain institutions from a rule that restricts their lending, depending on what they hold in deposits; reduce the number of institutions labeled as systemically important; and put more responsibility on the Federal Reserve and other regulators to intervene in the event of a crisis. The Economic Growth, Regulatory Relief, and Consumer Protection Act is a rare bipartisan effort; given its support in both houses and both parties, its passage is all but certain. Off of Capitol Hill, the bill’s reception has been mixed. Conservatives largely love it, moderates largely support it, progressives largely hate it, and many left-of-center types argue it is less of a regulatory gutting than they expected from a Republican-dominated Congress. “It’s difficult to categorize this as a pile of horrendous ideas, or as a motherhood-and-apple-pie, just-helping small-community-banks [effort],” said Aaron Klein of the Brookings Institution, who helped author the Dodd-Frank banking legislation of 2010. Much of the criticism of the bill has focused on the way it might end up reducing the regulatory burden on big banks, not just small ones. Some of the country’s largest, most risk-hungry, and most powerful financial institutions have been on a quiet campaign to loosen regulations, such as one determining how much leverage “custodial banks,” ones that safeguard assets for rich clients and institutional investors, are allowed to have. “In general, I’m against exempting anything from the simple leverage ratio,” Klein told me. “Once you start exempting one bank, where does the logic end?” He expressed concern that exempting institutions from the rule would increase the chance banks would game the regulatory system, and increase systemic risk. Moreover, the bill largely fails to address the most prevalent consumer-protection issues of recent years, namely the widespread fraud at Wells Fargo and the data breaches at Equifax.

Then there are the provisions regarding redlining and discrimination in lending—ones largely overlooked, but potentially important. The legislation in process includes a number of technical changes that stand to put borrowers of color, mobile-home owners, and rural residents at risk. Chief among these is a change letting banks that make fewer than 500 mortgage loans a year report less data to the government on who they lend to and at what rates—data meant to help show whether financial institutions are discriminating against families of color. According to data from the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, the legislation might exempt four out of every five banks and credit unions. Supporters of the provision have argued that the vast majority of mortgage loans would still be covered by these reporting requirements, which stem from the 1975 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) and were expanded by Dodd-Frank, and also argued that the intention is to make things easier for small banks without the resources to handle the data reporting. An amendment made to the bill this week also required small banks that have gotten low scores on examinations performed by the government to provide the full scope of HMDA data. But fair-lending groups, civil-rights organizations, and Democratic politicians have pointed out that many financial institutions would still be able to discriminate and hide their discrimination—and the government, journalists, and housing activists would have fewer tools to detect troublesome patterns. That might make it harder for regulators to identify discriminatory lending practices that might precipitate another crisis going forward, or simply make the country’s yawning racial wealth gap worse. “The only way to enforce fair-lending laws is to have an accurate picture of what the market looks like,” Scott Astrada, the director of federal advocacy for the Center for Responsible Lending, a policy-research group, told me.

Yet much of the nation, when it comes to Trump, is siding with Californians. The president's popularity is above 50% in only 12 states, according to the polling organization Gallup. In California, just 22% of voters approved of the job Trump was doing as president in a USC Dornsife/Los Angeles Times poll in November; 66% disapproved. That suggests a significant loss of support even from his dismal election showing, though two-thirds of Republicans remain supportive.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Elon Musk says a colony on Mars is a pressing matter to ensure the survival of the human race

Elon Musk, a man prone to ludicrous deadlines, has birthed another: test flights of his Mars spaceship next year.

"I think we’ll be able to do short flights, up and down flights, some time in the first half of next year," he told an audience at the South by South West (SXSW) festival in Austin, Texas.

He said it was vital humans reached the Red Planet before the next "probable" world war.

A Mars colony, he said, would reduce the chance of an extended new Dark Ages if a nuclear conflict was to wipe out life on Earth.

But, aware of his reputation, he added: "Sometimes my timelines are a little... y’know."

More pressing to Mr Musk, and the investors that enable him, might be the backlog of orders for the Model 3, Tesla's "affordable" new car. The company is still way behind on its production targets.

Life on Mars

But enough about reality.

Elon Musk is unquestionably the most interesting businessman in Silicon Valley - arguably the world - thanks to his almost single-handed reignition of the space race.

After a string of failed rockets - and near bankruptcy - SpaceX wowed the world with its latest flight, Falcon Heavy, in February.

A highlights reel of that event, soundtracked to David Bowie's Life on Mars, was shown to attendees at the festival.

The ultimate goal of the mission, of course, is a Mars colony. At the event, Mr Musk painted a picture of what he felt such a society would need to look like in order to be a success.

"I think most likely the form of government on Mars would be a direct democracy, where people vote directly on issues," he said.

"Everyone votes on every issue and that’s how it goes."

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption SpaceX is building the BFR rocket to enable humans to go to Mars

A Mars colony is a pressing matter, in Mr Musk's eyes, if we are to ensure the survival of the human race.

"I think it’s unlikely that we’ll never have a world war again," he said.

"This has been our pattern in the past."

On a lighter note, Mr Musk said he was excited about the potential for launching new industries from a complete fresh starting point.

Mars will need pizza joints, and one day people will drink at a Mars Bar, he said - congratulating himself on the Dad joke.

'Extremely important'

Repeating concerns he's made in the past with even more vigour, he said a bigger threat to human life was artificial intelligence - not nuclear war.

"AI is far more dangerous than nukes," he said, dismissing the pushback from AI experts who suggested Mr Musk was more interested in controversy than studying the work.

"I’m not normally an advocate of regulation and oversight," he added.

"This is a situation where you have a very serious danger to the public. There needs to be a public body that has insight and oversight so that everyone is delivering AI safely. This is extremely important.

"Nobody would suggest that we allow anyone to just build nuclear warheads if they want, that would be insane.

"My point was AI is far more dangerous than nukes. So why do we have no regulatory oversight? It’s insane."

Your view on Elon Musk will likely depend on whether you believe his wild claims about life on Mars.

The prevailing mood here, of course, is that Mr Musk is a visionary of the highest order. And if he doesn't try and get us to Mars, who will?

Correction: An earlier version of this article said the test flights would be 'to Mars'. While Mr Musk eventually intends to reach the planet, next year's tests will involve trial runs of the ship into space.

A little boy born with no eyes and a gap in his face is bravely raising awareness of what it's like to live with facial differences.

Christian Buchanan, six, was born with a condition called Tessier cleft lip and palate - so rare there are only thought to be 60 cases documented in medical history.

The condition is caused by the facial tissues not joining properly during a baby's development.

It can leave sufferers with severe facial disfigurement, unable to eat, speak and see.

Christian's mum, Lacey, from Woodbury, Tennessee, said as a result of her son's condition he's never been able to see.

"His condition was caused by amniotic banding syndrome," she said.

"Fibrous bands can form in the womb and if they attach to the baby they cut off blood flow, so Christian's banding happened to attach to his face."

STRANGER GIVES MOM $1G TO HELP FIX INFANT'S SEVERE CLEFT LIP

When Christian was born, he was unable to eat due to the large gaps on his face where the cleft palate was and has used a feeding tube since he was four days old.

Despite learning and speech difficulties, Christian's condition hasn't stopped him from living a full life.

Lacey explained, “Christian is a very typical six-year-old little boy. He's learning to read, he likes to wrestle with his little brother - all the things that any six-year-old would enjoy.

“The biggest way Christian’s condition affects his daily life is his vision impairment."

“Because he is completely blind, he has to learn to navigate the world in the dark.

"Our world is made for sighted people and he has to learn to live in it without the benefit of sight and so we have to do things a little differently sometimes but its totally doable and he is doing it.”

The six-year-old has so far had seven operations, three to reconstruct his face and close the gaps that the cleft created.

And mom Lacey said he is set to have more surgery, with the hope that one day he will be able to speak and eat properly.

While she hoped to bring her son up in a world that understands different conditions, Lacey said she's been shocked by people's reactions to Christian.

“I was unaware before Christian was born that there is this huge social stigma about being different, looking different, and most people didn’t know how to handle somebody with that type of difference," Lacey said.

“Just recently we had an issue, we were in a store and Christian was playing with a little toy in the shelf and a lady walked by and said, ‘eww'."

Lacey said Christian has heard people making comments, hearing kids say things like "why does he look like that?" and "what's wrong with his eyes?".

She said she always answers back in a very positive, upbeat tone, telling people it's just how he was born.

BABY BORN WITHOUT EYES DESPITE MOM'S NORMAL PREGNANCY

When kids ask why he has red eyes, Lacey tells them, "That's just how he was made, he has got red eyes, you know, it's cool."

And she said her son has learned to tell people "that's just how God made me."

"He would say, 'that's how I was born and I was born awesome'," Lacey said.

As well as being a keen violinist, Christian is currently working towards an orange belt in karate.

Lacey said, “I would definitely describe Christian as independent.

"I remember a few years ago he started saying, ‘I want to do it all by myself mummy'.

“He’s curious and he wants to explore the world and he’s not afraid to do it.”

Despite how brave her son is and how far he has come, Lacey said she can't help but worry about his future.

That's why she's determined to raise awareness of disabilities, to help make the world a better place for her son, and many others like him.

She added, "I want to share my family’s story to raise awareness for disabilities in general and specifically facial differences.

“I want to do away with those preconceived notions that people have about what it means to have a disability, what it means to have a facial difference.

"And I hope that I’m fostering an atmosphere of acceptance and understanding and respect for differences so that the world will just be a better place for Christian one day.”

Editor's Note: CNN is committed to covering gender inequality wherever it occurs in the world. This story is part of As Equals, a year-long series.

Hundreds of thousands of Muslim women descend on Mecca in Saudi Arabia each year to take part in the Hajj, but in recent weeks some female worshipers have told CNN they experienced incidents of sexual abuse or harassment while participating in the five-day pilgrimage.

Five women told CNN they were compelled to share their stories after a Pakistani woman's account of being sexually abused at the Hajj went viral on Facebook last month. That post (since deleted) prompted an outpouring of similar stories from female pilgrims on social media.

The Hajj is a spiritual pinnacle for Muslims around the world, with up to three million pilgrims traveling to Mecca to participate each year. In 2016, almost 42% of all worshipers were women . Every Muslim who is physically and financially able to, is required to do the pilgrimage once in their lifetime. As one of the largest annual pilgrimages in the world, crowd control poses a major challenge.

Most of the incidents of sexual abuse and harassment reported to CNN happened during the tawaf ritual, a counter-clockwise procession around the Kaaba shrine. Only some of the women who shared their stories with CNN reported the incidents to police in Saudi Arabia but those who did said their complaints were ignored.

Responding to CNN, an unnamed Saudi official familiar with Hajj affairs said the Kingdom does not tolerate this kind of behavior anywhere, especially at holy sites and added that allegations made by the women were being taken very seriously by authorities.

"Anyone found guilty of committing these acts faces serious consequences including imprisonment and caning," the Saudi official said. "By Royal Order, female police officers and investigators are now being added to the police force and security services including the Public Prosecution Department, so there will be a greater female security and police presence within the country and at the Holy sites to handle any issues that may arise."

Saudi Arabia already issued a royal decree in September 2017 to outlaw sexual harassment. A new law is currently being drafted.

Below are the five women's stories. They have been edited for clarity and length. Some women requested to remain anonymous because they fear a backlash within their communities.

Asra Nadeem, a Pakistani woman living in the US

I was 21 years old in 2006 when I did the Hajj for the first time.

First, I got stuck in the 2006 stampede during the Stoning of the Devil in Mina and that itself was very traumatic. It was horrible.

But a few days later I went back to Mecca to perform Umrah (a shorter form of the Hajj pilgrimage that can be performed at any time of the year). During that time, I was on my own, doing tawaf around the Kaaba.

The closer you get to the Kaaba, the more crowded it gets. Everybody wants to touch the Kaaba. I wanted to get closer to touch it, and in the last circle the crowd was moving really slowly.

I was next to the Kaaba and somebody grabbed my bum. I thought it was just the crowd; everyone was pushing. But then, when I moved up, somebody grabbed my boobs.

I turned my head and I saw this guy just smirking at me. I couldn't do anything, and he was still holding my breast. So, I yelled at him, and then people started pushing me forward, shouting "yalla" ("hurry up").

I reported the incident to the first two guards that I saw but both of them did not speak English and told me to move along.

I've met a few people who messaged me the same experience but in 2006 you didn't want to talk about it, before Facebook or anything.

Hajj is a spiritual experience -- you're in a different state of mind. You're praying for things, it's very Zen-like. Your first instinct is that it cannot possibly be happening, but it's there, in your face

I didn't go back to do Hajj. It was very traumatic, first the stampede and then the harassment.

Anonymous British woman, now living in Asia

I had never been sexually assaulted before I went to Mecca, in 2007 when I was 32. The first time it happened I was heading into the Grand Mosque to perform tawaf. A man was heading out, towards the courtyard, and as he approached me he outstretched his arm and grabbed my breast. It wasn't a clumsy brush. It was a grab. It was forceful and it hurt. He didn't let go immediately. He squeezed and was looking at me the whole time.

The second time I was in the courtyard of the Grand Mosque and I felt something pressing into my lower spine. It was crowded and lots of people were bumping into each other. But the pressing continued. I turned around and saw it was a man and realized he was pressing his erection into me. He was pushing against me so hard he was almost driving me forward. He too was looking at me and holding my gaze. I ran off and found a policeman and told him (in English) what had happened. He shooed me away. He had no interest in listening to me. I even pointed out the man in the crowd and the policeman still ignored me.

The third time I was in a side street looking at Hajj-related merchandise. I felt a sharp jab from behind. An old man had put his hand between my buttocks with such force that his fingers were almost inside me. It happened really fast and I cried out in shock. He looked at me and smiled and said "Alhamdulillah" ["Praise to God"]. The person at the stall had his back turned and didn't see anything.

I was assaulted each time in broad daylight with thousands of people around me. I was amazed at the audacity of the three men and I was angry that there was no recourse.

I was told before I left that I might get touched inappropriately. But it didn't prepare me for the shock. I think assault happens a lot more at the Hajj than people -- Muslims -- would like to believe. It is the holiest place in Islam, a once-in-a-lifetime experience. Talking about sexual assault is difficult enough and talking about it in connection with the Hajj, which is a pillar of Islam, is even harder because it is sacred.

I did return to the Hajj a few years later...but I was militant about my personal space. I would almost run to where I needed to be so nobody could touch me and did a lot of my work late at night or early in the morning when it was quieter outside. I didn't perform tawaf and I would zip through the courtyard of the Grand Mosque. It was my second visit so I knew all the tunnels and shortcuts.

Anonymous woman, Indonesia

I am from Indonesia and I was going to Mecca for Umrah in 2011, when I was 17

First, I got catcalled. I was waiting in the hotel's lobby for my room and there were two males that started to stare at me and laughed. I ignored them and they started to call me "cantik" (Indonesian for "beauty"), with smirks on their faces.

When I did tawaf around the Kaaba, another pilgrim walked behind me and stuck his erect penis into my back.

I felt angry and unsafe. I could not complain about it to anyone because of the situation and everyone thinks "it is the holy city -- who would do that?"

I haven't come back for Umrah/Hajj. I am not sure that I would. Even after it happened I could not focus on my prayer and worship, just counting down when would I leave Mecca.

It's a terrible situation when you are in a mosque, in front of the Kaaba, where you should feel the closest to God and the worst thing happens.

I've told no one about this one until today. I don't know, maybe I didn't want to remember the situation or I didn't like that people would be asking "Why are you walking alone?" or "Why you are not using a black abaya?"

Anonymous woman, Egypt

I was harassed two times, one verbally and the other time physically.

The verbal was while I was walking with my sisters and mom during Umrah. Heading back to the hotel after prayers, a shop clerk said something with the implication of "come over here, pretty girl." Mind you, I was 13, I never forgot it. I was very confused and disgusted with myself.

The second time was during Hajj, at the Stoning of the Devil area in Mina, just east of Mecca. In the midst of the crowd, I felt someone grab my boobs, I looked back and it was a man with his wife next to him. He didn't respect his wife nor the holy city so he won't respect me either.

Again, I was confused and disgusted with myself and I was just 17. For years after I've always said it might've been by mistake or unintentional since it's the holy city and Hajj -- but Twitter made me realize I'm not the only one.

Anooshe Mushtaq, a Pakistani woman living in Australia

When I was 10 years old my family was posted to Libya. My father was in the Pakistani air force and was posted there for four years. In 1980, my parents decided to perform Hajj.

I remember I was very excited as performing Hajj is a privilege. My parents traveled to Saudi Arabia with their two daughters. My sister and I were looking forward to going to Mecca and seeing the Kaaba for the first time.

When we entered the Kaaba it was very crowded.

Suddenly a young man groped me from behind. I felt extremely uncomfortable. I grabbed my mother's hand and moved in front of her. I didn't know if I should tell my mum or not so I just kept quiet.

During Hajj we were supposed to travel on a bus from Mecca to Medina. As we sat in the bus my sister and I sat next to each other and our parents sat in the seats behind each us.

The bus conductor was checking tickets. The bus conductor stood beside my seat and acted like he wanted to fix something on the inside of my seat. He moved his hand on my chest and groped my upper leg and he would not leave it. I felt angry and disgusted but didn't know what to do. He then reached out as if he was fixing the curtains while thrusting his groin in my face.

I didn't tell anyone due to shame and honor of my family and I kept quiet. I never told anyone what happened during Hajj until I recently saw the sexual assault post.

If I get a chance I will perform Hajj a second time in the future.

— Tamara Qiblawi contributed to this report.
