
President Trump and lawmakers are still struggling to come up with a plan for the hundreds of thousands of young, undocumented immigrants living in the United States.

In September, the Trump administration announced its plan to phase out the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program (DACA) – which provides a level of amnesty to certain undocumented immigrants, many of whom came to the U.S. as children – with a six-month delay for recipients.

Trump set a deadline of March 5 as the end date for the DACA program, but a lower court ordered the administration to continue to accept renewal applications indefinitely. The U.S. Supreme Court declined in late February to take up the administration's request for an appeal of the order that requires the continuing acceptance of renewal applications.

The Department of Homeland Security has confirmed that it is continuing to process renewal requests but is not accepting new ones.

Here’s a look at the DACA program and why the Trump administration wants to dismantle it.

What is the DACA program?

The DACA program was formed through executive action by former President Barack Obama in 2012 and allowed certain people who came to the U.S. illegally as minors to be protected from immediate deportation. Recipients, called Dreamers, were able to request “consideration of deferred action” for a period of two years, which was subject to renewal.

“Deferred action is a use of prosecutorial discretion to defer removal action against an individual for a certain period of time,” U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services stated. “Deferred action does not provide lawful status.”

Individuals were able to request DACA status if they were under the age of 31 on June 15, 2012, came to the U.S. before turning 16 and continuously lived in the country since June 15, 2007.

Individuals also had to have a high school diploma, GED certification, been honorably discharged from the military or still be in school. Recipients could not have a criminal record.

It did not provide “legal status.”

How many people are affected by DACA?

Nearly 800,000 undocumented youth are under the program's umbrella.

Thousands of people could lose their jobs if the DACA program is rescinded permanently, according to a study by left-leaning think tank Center for American Progress.

Daniel Garza, president of the conservative immigration nonprofit Libre Initiative, told Fox News that DACA offers a “reprieve from a life of uncertainty for innocent kids who didn’t break the law.”

“It’s rather disappointing to think they could return to a state of anxiety and fear,” he said.

What did the Trump administration do?

The Trump administration announced in September 2017 that it planned to phase out DACA for current recipients, and no new requests would be granted. But a lower court order requires the administration to continue accepting renewal applications for those under the DACA program, and the Supreme Court rejected the Trump administration's request to intervene.

While the courts’ decisions have relieved much of the urgency surrounding the March 5 deadline, there are nearly 22,000 people whose initial applications have yet to be decided and are at risk until their petitions are granted.

DHS confirmed that it is still processing renewal applications as normal but is not accepting new DACA applications from individuals who did not already have it, the department said in a statement.

Since the announcement, Trump has offered to work with lawmakers on a solution for the hundreds of thousands of people in the U.S. who fell under DACA’s umbrella of protections. But he has also repeatedly blamed Democrats on social media for lack of a solution.

Earlier this year, Trump released his “four pillars” of immigration reform, which included a provision for legal status for DACA recipients and others who would be eligible for DACA status. The White House estimated that total to be 1.8 million people. The Senate rejected the plan.

Republicans – and some Democrats – opposed Obama’s directive establishing DACA from the start as a perceived overreach of executive power.

Obama spoke out on social media after the Trump administration announced a plan to dismantle the program, stating that it's "self-defeating ... and it is cruel" to end DACA and questioned the motive behind the decision.

Do any DACA recipients serve in the military?

Despite some rumors circulating online to the contrary, Dreamers were eligible to serve in the U.S. military since 2014 when the Pentagon adopted a policy to allow a certain amount of undocumented immigrants to join.

In fiscal year 2016, 359 DACA recipients had enlisted in the Army – which is the only branch to accept immigrants of this category.

A Department of Defense official said in April that the military would continue to accept noncitizen recruits, but it is unclear if that will continue to be the case.

Fox News' John Roberts and The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Muslim-American leaders have been arrested at the US Capitol while urging Congress to stand against President Donald Trump's effort to end a programme that protects certain young immigrants.

Omar Suleiman, Dawud Walid, Mujahid Fletcher, Talib Shareef and Nihad Awad of the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR), Zahra Billoo, and Linda Sarsour advocated immigration reform before getting arrested on Monday.

The protesters participated in an act of civil disobedience at the office of the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Paul Ryan, demanding that he meet them to hear their concerns.

LIVE from @SpeakerRyan's office where Jewish and Muslim faith leaders have joined efforts to demand a #DreamActNow. https://t.co/rI5A6IXj5f — CWS #DREAMACTNOW (@CWS_global) March 5, 2018

Dreamers

Demonstrations have taken place in major cities across the US in support of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) programme that protects young undocumented immigrants from deportations.

Fletcher, who also came to the US as a child from Columbia, said he shared the experience of the Dreamers, people who came into the US illegally as children.

"We don't want to live based on fear. We want to live according to the principles of freedom of speech, of religion," he said.

Trump has long desired to end renewal applications for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) programme. Its recipients, known as the Dreamers, were thrown into legal uncertainty after Trump moved last year to end the programme, which protects hundreds of thousands of Dreamers.

Trump gave legislators until yesterday, March 5 to come up with a replacement, before a Supreme Court ruling delayed that deadline for as much as a year.

He has been locked in bitter negotiations with Democrats about replacing the programme in exchange for a raft of immigration overhauls that would end other avenues of legal immigration.

#MuslimsForDream

Quoting Malcolm X, Talib Shareef of the Muslim Alliance of North America said: "Almighty Allah has told us to stand for justice. We are not weak in faith and we are here for a mobilization.

"We stand here in the spirit of Malcolm X with the people who are affected by these policies."

"This is creating real fear," Suleiman said, adding that the imams are fighting white supremacy because Islamophobia, racism and hostility against immigrants all stem from the same roots.

Democrats are threatening to shut down the federal government, refusing to pass a spending bill unless it contains a path to legal status for the so-called “Dreamers” protected under President Obama’s DACA (Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals) program.

Are the Democrats really concerned with the status of these young people brought to the U.S. illegally as children, or with reforming our broken immigration system? No. They are trying to score political points.

Let’s review:

Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., recently went to a closed-door meeting at the White House to push his immigration plan. He was so genuinely intent on getting a bipartisan deal done to save the Dreamers that he torpedoed the entire undertaking by running to the microphones and claiming President Trump’s made a “racist” comment about “s---hole” countries.

Does that make any sense? No, it does not.

Durbin knew full well when he made his accusation that President Trump used such vulgar language that a media firestorm would be unleashed. He was betting that if the talks broke down, and Congress failed to resolve the Dreamer issue, President Trump would be blamed.

That, to Durbin and his Democratic colleagues – Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer of New York and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi of California – is much, much more important than actually lifting the cloud of uncertainty that hovers over the heads of the so-called Dreamers.

Here is the reality: Democrats are scared to death that a Republican Congress and a Republican president may actually effect some reform of our flawed immigration system. They have pursued the Hispanic community vigorously for many years, seeking to solidify their support within the country’s fastest growing demographic.

Part of the Democratic strategy has been to demonize the GOP as racist and anti-immigrant. Trump’s candidacy and his careless comments about Mexicans greased the skids.

In their eagerness to curry favor with Hispanics, Democrats have increasingly abandoned their earlier professed support for secure borders. Though they continue to pay lip service to protecting against illegal immigration, many have opposed the use of E-verify and other approaches that might reduce the allure of entering the U.S. without authorization.

The Democrats have also encouraged the spread of sanctuary cities, where local governments limit their cooperation with federal officials on the enforcement of U.S. immigration laws. And they just hate Trump’s proposed wall along our southern border.

Now many Democrats are insisting they will not vote for a spending bill needed to keep government operating beyond Friday night unless it includes a lopsided DACA fix proposed by Senators Durbin and Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., which allows Dreamers a path to legal status but skimps on border enforcement.

Though nearly everyone supports protecting Dreamers against deportation, Republicans and the White House want to couple that with enhanced border security, to make sure that what some are calling “amnesty” does not result in great numbers of new people flooding in without permission.

Democrats are taking a risk. Most Americans are compassionate and welcoming to immigrants, recognizing the invaluable contributions of those who have come to the U.S. from other nations legally.

But, at the same time, most Americans favor border enforcement. Hillary Clinton found that out the hard way, when WikiLeaks exposed her making this comment in 2013: "My dream is a hemispheric common market, with open trade and open borders, sometime in the future.…”

Those remarks gave candidate Trump the ammunition he needed to paint his opponent as weak on protecting our borders; it didn’t help that the lines came from a paid speech Clinton made to a Brazilian bank.

Polling has shown that 65 percent of Americans favor coupling legal status for the Dreamers with tougher immigration enforcement. Some 79 percent of those surveyed think employers should have to verify the legal status of their workers, for instance. Democrats balking at such a compromise are on the wrong side of this issue.

Many in the liberal media argue that the GOP will be blamed for any spending impasse that forces a government shutdown, since Republicans have a majority in both houses of Congress and occupy the White House. But Americans understand that passing a budget requires 60 votes in the Senate, which Republicans do not have. Republicans will need at least 10 Democratic votes.

Democrats are in a pickle. They can anger the nation by blocking a proposed spending resolution that lacks a DACA fix but that would fund our military and provide a six-year extension of the popular Children’s Health Insurance Program. Or they can infuriate Hispanics by keeping the federal lights on and working to resolve the Dreamer problem as part of a broader immigration package.

Latinos do not look to Republicans to fix this problem; they expect Democrats to do so. It isn’t the office of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., that has attracted a protest demonstration by immigration activists – it is Chuck Schumer’s.

Everyone wants changes to our immigration system, including the White House. And nearly everyone wants to protect the Dreamers. There’s lots of room to negotiate, and President Trump has signaled support for a compromise.

But a compromise – a win – on immigration would be another nightmare for Democrats. The optics of President Trump hosting a signing ceremony in the White House to celebrate passage of an immigration bill, which has eluded the past several presidents, would be unimaginably valuable for Republicans as we approach the November elections.

A new immigration law would be almost as valuable for Republicans as the millions of workers getting bonuses and wage hikes because of the GOP tax bill that President Trump signed into law.

A few more wins and Democrats are going to have a hard time persuading voters that President Trump and a Republican Congress aren’t indeed Making America Great Again.

Hannity Battles Ramos on Immigration: 'Are You Literally Saying They're Lying?'

Acting ICE Director Tom Homan responded Thursday to a flurry of criticism from California Democrats over the Trump administration's lawsuit that seeks to block the state's sanctuary policies.

California Gov. Jerry Brown blasted Attorney General Jeff Sessions on Wednesday, accusing the administration of trying to "polarize America."

"At a time of unprecedented political turmoil, Jeff Sessions has come to California to further divide and polarize America. Jeff, these political stunts may be the norm in Washington, but they don’t work here. SAD!!!” said Brown.

Sen. Kamala Harris (D-Calif.) accused ICE of potentially abusing its power by going after illegal immigrants who do not pose a public safety threat to the community.

Homan said Harris' arguments are factually inaccurate. He said he has invited Harris and Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) to several meetings in recent months to explain the enforcement operations and each time the senators have cancelled.

"Nine out of every 10 aliens we arrested [in the last fiscal year] did have a criminal history. ... They don't want to know the facts. They want to keep playing this political game and put smoke and mirrors up about what ICE is actually doing," he said on "Fox & Friends."

California Senator @KamalaHarris says the Trump administration is giving #ICE too much power. Acting ICE Director Thomas Homan responds on @foxandfriends: "We're not abusing our authority, we are enforcing the law." pic.twitter.com/I8hS4rAlwr — Brian Kilmeade (@kilmeade) March 8, 2018

The Justice Department filed a lawsuit this week to block three recently-passed California state laws that interfere with federal immigration policies.

One of the laws limits state and local cooperation with Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), while another prevents private companies from voluntarily cooperating with federal immigration enforcement officials.

Federal officials have accused California of standing in the way of its plan to step up enforcement of federal immigration laws.

The Justice Department is also reviewing Oakland Mayor Libby Schaaf's decision to warn of an immigration sweep in advance, which ICE said allowed hundreds of immigrants to escape detention.

Homan said ICE is not "going to war" against California, explaining that he is getting "numerous" emails from citizens who support the enhanced enforcement of immigration laws.

"Let's make something clear: there's no prerequisite that an alien has to commit yet another crime when they get to the United States to have the law enforced upon them," he said.

Homan said "more people will die" trying to come to the United States over the Mexican border if they believe they can reach a state where they will be shielded from deportation.

Watch the interview above.

Slain Border Patrol Agent's Brother Pleads for Trump, Sessions to Reopen 'Fast and Furious' Case

Sessions: California Is Blocking Federal Immigration Enforcement With 'Radical' Policies

Judge Nap: Mueller's Probe Is 'Gearing Up and the President Remains in His Crosshairs'

The illegal immigrants brought to the U.S. as children – known as Dreamers – say that they have been failed by Democrats who are more interested in blaming President Trump and Republicans than delivering a congressional measure that would protect the young people from deportation as they await a path to legal residency.

Dreamers are done giving Dems a pass.

“They don’t walk their talk,” said Cata Santiago, a 20-year-old Dreamer who was brought to the U.S. from Mexico when she was just 8 years old. “We’re tired of it. We’re tired of believing them when they say ‘It’s the Republicans.’ They make promises when they’re in an election, and when it’s over they’re done and don’t do anything.”

“I’ve decided to put my faith in my community [of Dreamers] and not in the Democrats,” Santiago told Fox News.

We're tired of believing [Democrats] when they say 'It's the Republicans.' They make promises when they're in an election, and when it's over they're done and don't do anything. - Cata Santiago, Dreamer

On Monday, when a program that temporarily shields such immigrants from deportation had been set to end, Dreamers held a sit-in at the national headquarters of the Democratic National Committee in Washington, D.C., to shine a spotlight on what the youths describe as the Democrats’ betrayal of them.

“The Democrats made the calculation to kick the can down the road and allow hundreds of thousands of us undocumented youth to live in uncertainty,” said Maria Duarte, one of the participants, in a statement. “We are anxious and we are scared of being torn away from our homes and our community.”

Many Dreamers say they are urging their supporters to suspend their affiliations with the Democratic Party until they see evidence that members of Congress who have portrayed themselves as working on a solution to their undocumented status are doing more than just making promises and giving reassurances.

Members of the Seed Project, a part of the Movimiento Cosecha (or the Harvest Movement), which advocates for undocumented immigrants, say they are determined “to continue to expose the Democrats’ false promises.”

In the short term, many want an extension of the program, a 2012 initiative by President Barack Obama called the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA. But what they most want is a permanent fix – congressional legislation that would give them a way to legalize their status in the only country many of these young people truly consider home.

Last year Trump said he would end the program and gave Congress six months to come up with a permanent fix, but bipartisan bickering has stalled various efforts to come up with a bill.

Some 800,000 immigrants received DACA, which allowed recipients to obtain work permits, driver’s licenses and some government benefits.

Two federal courts ordered the Trump administration to continue accepting DACA renewal applications.

Democrats relinquished the leverage they had for meaningful legislation...[they] aren't fooling anyone. - Cesar Vargas, immigration activist, civil rights attorney

Many Dreamers have blamed Democrats, particularly Sen. Chuck Schumer of New York, for boasting about having plans that will result in legislation to benefit Dreamers, but then letting the ball drop by failing to push assertively for the youths, or by refusing to compromise for the sake of political optics.

“Democrats relinquished the leverage they had for meaningful legislation,” wrote Cesar Vargas, a civil rights attorney who has advocated for immigrant causes, in an opinion piece in the Huffington Post.

Democrats, Vargas said, “aren’t fooling anyone.”

“Democrats have no plan, and once again, Schumer, now the minority leader, is showing that protecting these immigrants…was never his priority,” he said. “The lack of leadership by Democrats, however, is nothing new. In 2009, they controlled the White House and Congress and still failed to bring up immigration reform for a vote.”

The DNC maintains that it is the only party that the Dreamers can count on.

DNC National Press Secretary Michael Tyler said to Fox News: "The Democratic Party is the only party that is standing with and committed to protecting Dreamers. Our Democratic President Barack Obama established DACA to provide relief for Dreamers because Congress failed to act."

"And now, Donald Trump has rescinded DACA to pander to his base all at the expense of Dreamers," Tyler said. "Democrats have put countless proposals on the table, and yet this president and Republican Congress refuse to take action."

Many Dreamers say that their disappointment in Democrats is nothing new, and goes back some 17 years.

In 2010, they say, Congress seemed close to passing a Dream Act when it passed in the House of Representatives, only to have it fail in the Senate after five Democrats voted against the measure.

The frustration directed at Democrats, the critics say, does not mean that they don’t blame Republicans for the Dreamers’ uncertain future.

But it’s the Democrats, they say, who have gone out of their way to depict themselves as their only hope on immigration efforts that will give them a chance to legalize their status. Obama did the same, many note, when he was running his presidential campaigns, only to end up presiding over a record number of deportations. They feel used.

The Democratic Party is the only party that is standing with and committed to protecting Dreamers...Donald Trump has rescinded DACA to pander to his base all at the expense of Dreamers. - Democratic National Committee spokesman Michael Tyler

“We’re done speaking to the Democrats behind closed doors and trusting them,” Santiago said, “everything is going to happen out in the open.”

Rev. Gabriel Salguero, president of the National Latino Evangelical Coalition, remembers taking political leaders to his churches around the country in 2010 to build momentum for Dreamer legislation.

“There’s been a lack of political will,” Salguero said to Fox News. “This is beyond partisanship, it’s a leadership issue. These kids trusted the process. We told them ‘If you play by the rules, if you wait, if you come forward, it will happen.’ They did everything that was asked of them. I understand their frustration.”

West Virginia teachers and politicians have come to an agreement to end a nine-day strike over demands for higher wages, better benefits and increased incentives to help fill the roughly 700 teaching vacancies in the state.

West Virginia Governor James Justice II said on Tuesday morning the tentative agreement will allow for the five percent pay increase teachers demanded. The money will come from budget cuts from his staff.

The bill passed the West Virginia Senate by a vote of 98 to one. Republicans in the Senate said it would entail "reduced government", one of their legislative goals.

The bill still needs to pass the lower house of the West Virginia legislature, the House of Delegates.

'Real winners are students'

Leaders from the three unions representing teachers gathered outside the state senate to address a crowd of hundreds of teachers and activists rallying to pressure the state legislator to pass a bill that would put teachers back in the classroom.

"You have had a victory … but the real winners of all of this are the students of West Virginia. We're making an investment in their future by investing in education," West Virginia Education Association President Dale Lee said to the crowd.

{articleGUID}

West Virginia teachers walked out of the classroom last week after months of negotiations over wages and benefits.

All schools in the state have been closed since February 22. It was the first teachers' strike in West Virginia since 1990.

West Virginia employs around 20,000 teachers.

The community rallied around both teachers and students. Food banks were opened to make sure students who depended on school-provided meals during the day would not go hungry.

Lee thanked the community and asked them to express gratitude to Justice for "making an investment in West Virginia".

Politicians in the Florida House have passed a school safety bill that includes new restrictions on rifle sales and a programme to arm some teachers.

The measure, a response to the shooting at Parkland high school that left 17 dead last month, was supported by the victims' families.

The school safety bill has been sent to Florida's Governor Rick Scott for his signature. If he signs it, the bill becomes law within 15 days.

The proposals include raising the minimum age for buying rifles from 18 to 21.

Al Jazeera's Andy Gallacher reports from Tallahassee, Florida.

PA Radio Host: Trump Steel Tariffs Could 'Mean a Lot' After Decades of 'Jobs Disappearing'

'How Much Are You Worth, Nancy?': Pelosi Heckled at Town Hall While Slamming Trump Tax Law

An Ohio forklift driver who switched parties in 2016 to support President Trump applauded the plan to impose new tariffs on steel and aluminum imports.

Geno DiFabio, who appeared alongside Trump at a rally in Youngstown over the summer, was a lifelong Democrat who embraced Trump's promise to end harmful trade deals.

Trump's tariff plan generated a huge backlash last week from his fellow Republicans, but was praised by an Ohio Democratic lawmaker. Trump has refused to back down, however, downplaying the fears of a trade war which have driven the stock market lower.

To protect our Country we must protect American Steel! #AMERICA FIRST — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 5, 2018

We are on the losing side of almost all trade deals. Our friends and enemies have taken advantage of the U.S. for many years. Our Steel and Aluminum industries are dead. Sorry, it’s time for a change! MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 5, 2018

DiFabio said that the workers he has spoken to in recent days are happy about Trump's announcement.

"Let's make it fair and we'll beat 'em. Those jobs will come back, the jobs are already coming back," he told Griff Jenkins Sunday, adding Trump is following through on "exactly what he said he was gonna do."

DiFabio said for decades, he and other workers watched as U.S. steel plants closed and they wondered why the U.S. manpower and technology was not being used.

"We invented the technology to make this stuff and they're taking it all off of us," he recalled.

He said President Trump is acting like a referee to level the playing field, whereas previous administrations declined to act on behalf of the American worker.

"The guy knows what he's doing."

Watch the interview above.

Top Dems Split from Pelosi on Tax Cut Criticisms, 'Crumbs' Statement

Trish Regan Calls Out Pelosi for 'Crumbs' Remark: 'What World Do You Live On?'

Rep. Gaetz to Jeff Sessions: Appoint a Second Special Counsel or 'Step Aside'

Image copyright Reuters Image caption Protesters have lobbied Florida's politicians over gun control since the shooting

New gun control measures for Florida have passed another legal hurdle, weeks after one of the worst school shootings in US history.

The state's House of Representatives passed a bill raising the age to buy a gun from 18 to 21 and imposing a three-day waiting period on all gun sales.

The bill, already passed by the Senate, now goes to the state governor.

Seventeen people were killed at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Florida, on 14 February.

Expelled former student Nikolas Cruz, 19, has been charged in the attack. He was formally indicted by a grand jury on Wednesday on 34 counts, including 17 counts of premeditated first-degree murder and 17 counts of attempted first-degree murder.

He is suspected of using a legally bought AR-15 semi-automatic rifle to carry out the 10-minute attack, gunning down teachers and students.

What is in the new law?

In addition to raising the age and bringing in the three-day waiting period, the legislation:

Introduces a voluntary armed "guardian programme" for schools, named after Aaron Feis, a coach who died in the Parkland shooting. It allows school personnel to be armed, subject to school district approval and specialist training

Classroom teachers are excluded from carrying arms unless they have a security forces background

Bans devices, such as bump stocks, that modify a semi-automatic weapon to fully automatic

Raises mental health funding and increases the power to seize or ban guns under mental health concerns

The legislation does not include a ban on the sale of assault-style weapons like the AR-15, despite it being a key demand of Parkland students and their parents.

Florida law already mandates a three-day waiting period for the purchase of a handgun but a person as young as 18 can buy a rifle with no waiting period.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption America's gun laws explained

The Republican-controlled House debated the bill for about eight hours on Wednesday before voting 67-50 in favour.

Has the move been welcomed?

Ryan Petty, whose daughter was among those killed, hailed the House's vote in a tweet.

He said: "We know that when it comes to preventing future acts of school violence, today's vote is just the beginning of our journey."

State Democratic Party legislators who backed the bill said it was necessary despite the "poison pill" of allowing more guns in schools under the guardian programme. Florida now joins at least six other states in allowing school employees to carry firearms.

Following the Parkland shooting, many surviving students had lobbied politicians for greater gun control.

Gun control activists will hope the Florida measures will be a turning point in their battle with the powerful National Rifle Association and others who defend firearms ownership under the Second Amendment of the US constitution.

On the day the vote passed, a 17-year-old woman student was killed in a suspected accidental shooting at a high school in Alabama.

What happens now?

Governor Rick Scott will need to sign the bill, known as the Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School Public Safety Act, into law.

It will automatically become law within 15 days unless he vetoes it.

Mr Scott has not yet said he will back it, telling reporters he would "review the bill line by line" and consult victims' families.

He has previously said he opposes US President Donald Trump's call to arm teachers. He had also previously opposed increasing the purchase age from 18 to 21.

President Trump’s America First strategy has been working. From his aggressive deregulation of burdensome and unnecessary Obama-era regulations to the continuing success of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, the president’s agenda is securing much-needed economic victories on behalf of Americans. But his recent tariff proposals would stall and ultimately undermine the progress he has made.

Trade is essential to a growing, successful economy. When it’s working as it should, trade opens new markets, strengthens international relationships and increases American productivity, while securing domestic industries and American jobs.

Such benefits complement the work President Trump and his administration have already done and would help achieve continuing success for the president and the country.

The president is right to be concerned that some trade deals disadvantage the United States when other countries don’t uphold their end of the deal. Countries like China have exploited trade relationships and should be held accountable.

Putting America First means examining issues thoroughly, anticipating all potential consequences of every decision and appropriately weighting costs versus benefits.

However, imposing across-the-board tariffs would hurt America’s relationships with reliable trading partners and be detrimental to the nation’s economic success.

With Sen. Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, I introduced the bipartisan United States Foreign Investment Review Act late last year. The legislation would help fulfill President Trump’s America First commitment by equipping the president and his administration with the ability to fight back against unfair trade barriers to U.S. exports and businesses, as well as empowering them to block foreign investment that threatens the United States’ long-term economic interests.

Measures like this would strengthen and promote the president’s agenda, while keeping the country on its current positive economic trajectory. Such measures would help achieve President Trump’s goal of leveling the playing field and enhancing American industry, rather than damaging it with higher prices and an overall decrease of global competitiveness.

Putting America First means examining issues thoroughly, anticipating all potential consequences of every decision and appropriately weighting costs versus benefits.

I detailed my concerns about tariffs – along with Sen. Joni Ernst, R-Iowa, and Iowa Representatives David Young, Rod Blum, Dave Loebsack and Steve King – in a recent letter to President Trump.

I’ve also expressed concerns about any serious changes to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), because they could lead to massive job losses and harm to rural America, especially in my home state of Iowa.

Similarly, President Trump’s proposed tariffs of 25 percent on imported steel and 10 percent on aluminum would significantly damage steel-dependent industries in the United States, which employ more than 6 million American workers.

Putting entire industries and millions of family-supporting jobs at risk puts us in a negotiating position we may soon be begging to get out of while inflicting real economic damage in the meantime.

In fact, America has already seen how this scenario plays out. According to data from the U.S. Labor Department, primary metals wholesale prices went from approximately 4 percent deflation to four percent inflation when then-President George W. Bush imposed steel tariffs in 2002. They were also the cause of a 3 percent increase in costs and were ultimately reversed in 2003.

Since January 2017, 2.3 million jobs have been added and the unemployment rate is at a 17-year low of 4.1 percent. U.S. weekly jobless claims are at the lowest level since 1969 and consumer confidence is at its highest level since November 2000.

The economy is on the right track thanks in large part to President Trump’s leadership. But imposing tariffs could wipe away all this progress as quickly as it would take the president to sign his name.

American trade policy would benefit from a stronger position, but it shouldn’t be at the expense of good-faith negotiations with trusted and friendly partners. To truly put America First, the president and his administration need to engage in efforts to secure better, fairer deals that increase U.S. exports and will help create more good-paying jobs for American workers, while unleashing investment and ramping up American innovation.

America First means lowering trade barriers and expanding access to more markets. The positive benefits of a smart, reasonable trade policy will help grow the American economy for generations to come and leave a lasting presidential legacy.

I’m confident that President Trump and his team can negotiate fair deals that will disincentive countries from gaming the system while maintaining the important relationships America has worked hard to cultivate and preserve for decades.

President Donald Trump's top economic adviser has resigned after clashing with the president over planned tariffs on steel and aluminium.

Gary Cohn's departure is the latest in a long string of departures. Cohn is expected to leave in a matter of weeks, the White House has confirmed on Tuesday.

Cohn, a free trade proponent and Goldman Sachs veteran, had been counselling the president against his proposal to impose a 25 percent tariff on steel and 10 percent tariff on aluminium imports.

Cohn was critical of Trump's singular, major legislative victory, playing a central role in the development of the Republican tax overhaul.

Trump's tariff plan has raised widespread concern about sparking trade wars with the US' trading partners, including from Cohn and the president's allies on Capitol Hill.

Trump response

Following the critics' narrative that the White House is in continued chaos, Trump denied the criticism as "fake news", saying on Twitter that "people will always come & go.

"I want strong dialogue before making a final decision. I still have some people that I want to change (always seeking perfection). There is no Chaos, only great Energy!" he said.

The new Fake News narrative is that there is CHAOS in the White House. Wrong! People will always come & go, and I want strong dialogue before making a final decision. I still have some people that I want to change (always seeking perfection). There is no Chaos, only great Energy! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 6, 2018

Voicing gratitude

After Cohn's departure was made public, Trump struck a thankful tone, saying he "did a superb job".

"Gary has been my chief economic advisor and did a superb job in driving our agenda, helping to deliver historic tax cuts and reforms and unleashing the American economy once again. He is a rare talent, and I thank him for his dedicated service to the American people," Trump said in a statement.

Cohn voiced his gratitude to the president in a statement issued by the White House.

"It has been an honor to serve my country and enact pro-growth economic policies to benefit the American people, in particular the passage of historic tax reform. I am grateful to the President for giving me this opportunity and wish him and the Administration great success in the future," Cohn said.

It was less than a week ago that a major storm brought damaging winds and flooding rain to much of the northeastern part of the United States.

Five people died as winds of 80 kilometres an hour brought down power lines, leaving nearly 1.7 million properties without power.

A very similar system is now bringing similar winds and widespread snow from Philadelphia through New York, and Boston to Maine.

Some 900,000 homes are already without power and this figure is likely to rise as the storm continues to develop.

The combination of strong winds and wet snow has brought down many trees and power lines. One person is reported to have been killed when a tree collapsed in Suffern, New York.

Thunderstorms embedded within the low-pressure system increased the intensity of snow to as much as 10 centimetres an hour in New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania and eastern New York.

By the end of Wednesday, some parts of New Jersey and New York were under as much as 60cm of snow.

Travel disruption has been severe. The heaviest of the snow appears to have fallen along the I-95, causing major delays. Bus services were also suspended by New Jersey Transit on Wednesday, and Amtrak rail services were reduced or suspended.

Around 2,700 flights were cancelled across the country on Wednesday, including several hundred flights from New York's three major airports.

Coastal flooding may be possible, although the risk is fairly low with the entry into a period of neap tides. In last week's storm, the strongest of the winds coincided with the full moon and spring tides.

The snow is expected to continue moving northeastwards on Thursday, across Maine, into New Brunswick and Nova Scotia in Canada, before easing on Friday.

President Trump is right to call for tariffs on steel and aluminum imports. Tariffs are often used as a last resort, but the domestic steel industry has reached that point. Rather than attacking the president for his proposal, all Americans should applaud him for beginning to end our nation’s wholesale surrender on trade.

The president’s action is already producing results, as U.S. Steel announced Wednesday that it will restart one of its idled blast furnaces in Granite City, Illinois and create approximately 500 jobs.

I have visited communities deeply affected by steel imports.

Coatesville, Pennsylvania is home to the oldest continuously operating steel mill in the country, and is among the last places in America capable of supplying the military with steel armor plate that meets exacting defense specifications.

In 2007, when the Pentagon escalated the war effort in Iraq, Coatesville’s sister mill in nearby Conshohocken turned its production on a dime to fulfill military orders for the steel needed in mine-resistant, ambush-protected vehicles.

Today, both mills teeter on the brink of collapse. So workers there listened intently when candidate Trump promised to rearrange trade agreements and bring factory jobs back to this country.

The president’s announcement last week of a 25 percent tariff on imported steel and a 10 percent tariff on imported aluminum is precisely what he promised. Enacting these tariffs will restore some needed sanity to the global trade in the metals markets, which is in imbalance because of the actions of China’s government.

Beijing has followed a state-led policy with a goal of dominating the global steel industry. This has been so successful that China now makes half the world’s steel. Big government subsidies enable Chinese steel mills to dump steel on world markets at prices below the cost of production, creating unfair competition for steel mills in the U.S. and other nations. There is no end in sight to the overcapacity China has created.

Chinese steel has consequentially flooded outside of its borders and roiled the global market, affecting mills and workers everywhere.

In the United States – the most open steel market in the world – 10 blast furnaces have closed since 2000, and our remaining mills only operate at roughly 75 percent of their capacity.

More than a quarter of our market is serviced by imports. During a decade of slow but steady economic expansion, the American steel industry has instead remained in a malaise, its workers plagued by the threat of layoffs.

This is the reality in steelmaking communities like Lorain, Ohio, or along the lakeshore in Northwest Indiana. Yet in the face of these facts, many of the president’s fellow Republicans are lashing out at his attempt to address these problems.

Despite that, President Trump beat an almost entirely free-trading field in the 2016 GOP primaries. Though he continues to enjoy support of the conservative base, some Republicans will apparently not stomach even this slightest break from trade policy dogma.

House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., and many House Republicans are seeking to block or water down President Trump’s plans, though last year Ryan himself proposed a 20 percent border adjustment tax on all imports.

National Economic Council Director Gary Cohn (before his resignation in protest Tuesday) was marshalling Wall Street collaborators and global companies to attack the tariffs proposal, even though taken to their maximum extent the tariffs would mean a $9 billion cost spread through a $20 trillion economy.

That same crowd completely misjudged America’s years-long economic embrace of the Chinese government, which is currently using this influx of wealth to fortify an enormous mercantilist police state.

These same critics argue tariffs will raise consumer costs and hurt steel communities far more than they help. But the only credible review of former President George W. Bush’s comparable tariffs in 2002 showed most steel consumers didn’t see a significant price hike, and that American steel prices rose even more slowly than global prices did.

Those tariffs allowed a domestic industry staggered by more than 30 bankruptcies time to recover – and even recapture market share before China’s steel juggernaut emerged.

The critics also claim there is no national security basis for protecting American steel. But they conveniently ignore the fact that you can’t build a steel mill quickly in an emergency, and that our steelmaking redundancies are already becoming thin.

The Navy’s Virginia-class submarines rely on specialty armor plate forged in places like Coatesville. There is only domestic producer of electrical steel necessary to build power transformers – the kind of infrastructure needed after a natural disaster in Texas or Puerto Rico.

An economics textbook wouldn’t see anything wrong with America offshoring its entire steel industry, but most Americans would be unnerved to be defended by tanks made with Chinese steel, nor would they support them rolling down Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington in a military parade.

Instead of attacking the president, the critics should instead show us their own plans to stop the economic bleeding in America’s industrial belt.

Because too often, it’s all about President Trump. He’s regularly accused of looking to the past when he speaks of industry, and specifically of steel.

But the people in our steel mill towns know their communities won’t ever again look like they did in the 1950s. That’s not what they’re asking for; they’re simply asking to be included in America’s future.

This tariff will give them a chance at that – and set the tone for how we should now approach China and its state-led capitalism.

Already, China is well on its way toward dominating the markets for future-oriented technologies like semiconductors and artificial intelligence, and it has used trade as a tool to achieve that objective. China forces technology transfers upon foreign firms operating in its borders. It rampantly abuses intellectual property protections.

And it’s even unsurprising then that the only time Chinese military officers have been indicted in the United States for cyber espionage was for spying on private businesses. What kind? American steel and aluminum industries, among other heavy manufacturing targets.

Those military officers will likely never face trial, but we have a chance now to defend America’s economic interests. Tariffs are a dirty word inside the Beltway. But I suspect that people who live elsewhere, in places like Coatesville, want to defend American jobs.

The New York Times issued an embarrassing correction after a report that attacked President Donald Trump’s recently passed tax plan got the numbers about as wrong as could be.

The lengthy Feb. 23 feature, headlined, “Get to Know the New Tax Code While Filling Out This Year's 1040,” sought to detail how Trump’s tax plan would hurt middle-class families. A hypothetical couple -- christened Sam and Felicity Taxpayer -- would see their tax bill rise by nearly $4,000, according to the story.

Then came the correction saying the family would actually see taxes go down.

The Wall Street Journal’s James Freeman mocked the Times piece before the Old Gray Lady issued the correction.

“Even perennial tax-increase advocate Warren Buffett is now acknowledging the economic benefit of the Trump tax cuts, but The New York Times newsroom still won’t concede the point,” Freeman wrote on Feb. 27. “Will criticism from a liberal law professor persuade The Times to reconsider?”

Well, The Times did reconsider -- but it may still not be 100 percent accurate.

“An earlier version of this article incorrectly described the probable effect of the new tax law on a hypothetical couple’s 2018 tax bill. The TurboTax ‘What-If Worksheet’ that generated the projection for their 2018 taxes failed to indicate that the couple would probably be entitled to claim a sizable deduction for income earned from consulting. As a result of that deduction, the amount they would likely owe on taxes would decline by $43, not rise by $3,896,” the correction states.

The accounting error in The Times’ original piece is quite significant for the family, which reported a combined income of $183,911. Freeman wrote a followup piece, noting that “a liberal law professor says The Times still doesn’t have the story quite right.”

Freeman pointed to University of Chicago tax law professor Daniel Hemel, who said Times editors still don’t understand Trump’s tax cuts.

“Still don’t see why Samuel & Felicity aren’t claiming nonrefundable dependent credits of $500 for their children Luke & Heidi and their parent Sydney, for additional tax savings of $1,500 under the new law,” Hemel recently tweeted.

In addition to Hemel’s analysis, a spokesperson for TurboTax’s parent company issued a statement to The Journal explaining that The Times used a program for the misleading feature that was not yet updated with the latest tax laws.

As much of the mainstream media looks for reasons to attack the president on a regular basis, the misleading feature on taxes peovides some evidence that many Americans don’t understand the benefits of tax reform or don't acknowledge positives because of political reasons.

“The search continues for Americans who will not benefit from the

Trump tax cuts on individual and corporate income,” Freeman wrote.

The New York Times did not immediately respond when asked if it would issue another correction based on Hemel’s analysis.

'Markets Do Not Like This': Sandra Smith Grills WH Trade Official on Steel Tariffs

President Trump's surprise plan to impose tariffs on aluminum and steel imports was met with widespread derision from his own party, including from Sen. Ben Sasse (R-Neb.), who called the idea potentially disastrous for American consumers.

Despite a significant drop in the stock markets Thursday and Friday, Trump gave no indication that he would back off the plan for a 25 percent tariff for steel imports and 10 percent tariff for aluminum imports.

We must protect our country and our workers. Our steel industry is in bad shape. IF YOU DON’T HAVE STEEL, YOU DON’T HAVE A COUNTRY! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 2, 2018

When a country Taxes our products coming in at, say, 50%, and we Tax the same product coming into our country at ZERO, not fair or smart. We will soon be starting RECIPROCAL TAXES so that we will charge the same thing as they charge us. $800 Billion Trade Deficit-have no choice! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 2, 2018

Sasse said what Trump proposed amounts to "leftist economic policy," arguing trade wars have never worked.

"If you own a steel mill, today was great for you. If you consume steel - and every American family bought something at the store tonight with metals in it - today's a bad day for you," he said, warning of future "retaliatory" measures against farmers, ranchers and consumers in the United States as the trade war worsens.

Trade is great for America. It's great for American families. Trade creates jobs & lowers prices for American families. Trade wars do the opposite. No trade war has ever worked. We don't want to make America 1930 again. pic.twitter.com/fK7oy7GcVz — Senator Ben Sasse (@SenSasse) March 2, 2018

Bret Baier asked Sasse about states, won by Trump in 2016, that have seen job losses due to China's trade practices and about the voters who supported Trump's position on trade.

"This is leftist economic policy and we've tried it a whole bunch of times over the last two centuries and every time, American families have suffered," he responded.

Sasse said Trump made a lot of promises on the campaign trail, but once he got into the White House he was advised toward positions that are better for the country long-term.

Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) echoed Sasse's sentiments, saying "whoever advised him on this ought to be reprimanded."

The new tariff plan, however, earned praise from some Democrats, including Rep. Marcy Kaptur of Ohio.

"I've served in Congress for over three decades. We've been waiting for this. We don't want to wait for the steel industry collapse. We can't afford to have the aluminum industry collapse in this country," said Kaptur.

Watch the interview above.

Columnist: I Bought My First Gun Because of the CNN Town Hall

'Imagine If Obama Said That': Tucker Calls Out Trump on 'Take Guns First' Comments

'Something Smells Like a Rat': Mark Levin Calls for 'Abolishing' the FISA Court

A great wailing and gnashing of teeth arose across the land last week after the Trump administration announced its plan to place tariffs on imported steel and aluminum. Some conservatives cried that the tariffs – 25 percent on steel and 10 percent on aluminum – would incite an international trade war.

House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., claimed the moderately sized tariffs on two metals would reverse the economic boon that he believes the tax breaks his party gave to corporations and the rich are sure to create. The good times would be over. Kaput!

This drama comes from a politician who proposed a border adjustment tax on all imports, not just two metals. That tax that would have cost American consumers $1 trillion.

This hyperbole comes from conservatives who deliberately blind themselves to the devastation Chinese trade cheating has caused the American steel and aluminum industries.

This hysteria comes from corporations that use steel and aluminum and are apparently just fine with Chinese trade violations completely killing off American producers, leaving our country without domestic suppliers of metals essential for national defense.

The tariff proposal wasn’t sudden or out of the blue. It came after President Trump announced last April that the U.S. Department of Commerce would evaluate whether the damage done to the American steel and aluminum industries by bad trade endangered national security. The Commerce Department told President Trump in December that it did.

The Commerce Department recommended remediation through tariffs, import limits or both. The department estimates the cost of the tariffs to the U.S. economy at $9 billion, or a fraction of 1 percent of the nation’s total gross domestic product – and a fraction of the cost of Speaker Ryan’s border adjustment tax.

The beverage industry went crazy anyway. Coors, for example, claimed the tariffs would cost jobs across the beer industry and “American consumers will suffer.”

Here’s what Coors calls suffering: a penny price hike. There is about three cents worth of aluminum in a beer can. A 10 percent tariff on aluminum could increase the price of an entire six-pack of Coors by not quite two cents. Little more than a penny.

Frankly, an extra penny or two doesn’t sound like real suffering. It’s not clear just how many football fans would forego the six-pack for Sunday’s game because of that extra penny. It’s not clear just how many beer industry jobs will really be lost because of one extra cent per six-pack.

The additional cost to a new car, which contains much more steel and aluminum, would be more significant. A senior economist at Cox Automotive estimated it at $200.

But that’s only if American aluminum and steel companies raise their prices by 10 and 25 percent.

American steel and aluminum manufacturers are not subject to the tariffs, so they don’t have to raise their prices. But they may need to increase their prices because excessive production of aluminum and steel in China has severely depressed prices worldwide.

China is massively overproducing the metals at massively subsidized mills. The Chinese government owns some mills and provides supports for the industries in the form of loans that don’t have to be repaid, low-cost or free raw materials and underpriced utilities. It then dumps its excess aluminum and steel on the world market at prices below production costs.

The Chinese action forces down the price of the metals to the point where mills in free market nations like the United States go bankrupt. It is a trade war perpetrated by China on the rest of the world.

China’s practices violate international trade rules. The United States, in conjunction with European allies and others, has repeatedly over the past decade negotiated with China to stop defying the rules it agreed to abide by when it gained entrance to the World Trade Organization. China repeatedly has said it would follow the rules. And then it doesn’t.

China’s actions have has killed American mills, thrown tens of thousands out of work and devastated mill towns. Steel employment in the United States has declined 35 percent since 2000, with 14,500 workers losing their jobs just between January of 2015 and June of 2016. The plummet in aluminum employment was even steeper, with 58 percent of jobs lost in just the three years between 2013 and 2016.

In 2000, 105 companies produced raw steel at 144 U.S. locations. Now 38 companies forge at 93 locations. There’s only one company left in the United States that produces the Navy armor plate used to build the Virginia Class submarines.

Over the past six years, six aluminum smelters closed permanently. Just five remain, with only two operating at full capacity. And only one of those produces the high-purity aluminum required for defense aerospace needs.

To see real suffering, Coors might take a look at unemployed aluminum and steel workers and their crumbling communities. Coors should note that both U.S. Steel and Century Aluminum have said the tariffs will enable them to reopen closed mills and rehire a total of 700 workers.

Unlike Coors, conservative TV commentators and Speaker Ryan, most Americans are willing to pay the extra penny per six-pack to ensure their country has the domestic aluminum smelting and steel forging ability that is crucial to our national security.

President Trump is signing an order Thursday that imposes tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from all foreign countries, while carving out an exception for Canada and Mexico for now while North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) negotiations are under way, White House officials told Fox News.

The president, joined by steel and aluminum workers, will sign a companion proclamation — one on steel and one on aluminum – that will institute a tariff of 25 percent on steel and 10 percent on aluminum imports. The tariffs will become effective in 15 days, with exclusions for Mexico and Canada taking effect “immediately,” officials said.

“A nation that does not protect prosperity at home cannot protect its interests abroad,” the president said. “When it comes time where our country can’t make aluminum and steel, you almost don’t have much of a country.”

A senior White House official said Thursday that the move to impose tariffs would protect “national security” from the effects of “unfair trade practices.”

The U.S. is the world’s largest importer of steel, importing nearly four times as much as it exports, according to the White House. The U.S. imported five times as much primary aluminum as it produced in 2016.

The senior official told reporters Thursday that the move came after an investigation, led by Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross, and interagency meetings from April 2017 through January 2018, which found that the current level of aluminum and steel imports to the U.S. had the “potential to threaten our national security.”

“The investigation provided the president with the powers to take actions, should the department find that imports of commodities like aluminum and steel provide a significant threat to our national security and economic security,” the official said, noting that national security was “broadly defined,” and not limited to national defense.

Ross recommended a 24 percent tariff on steel, but the administration official said that the official 25 percent tariff was based on additional data and support.

Aluminum is used in a range of ground weapons and aircraft, and steel is required for aircraft carriers, amphibious force ships, submarines, tanks and light armored vehicles. The White House said the investigation rendered the U.S. “unable” to produce enough steel and aluminum to meet national defense and critical industry needs in the event of a national emergency.

The move though, should not be a “surprise,” according to the official, who called it another “promise made” and “promise kept” by Trump.

“No one should be surprised with any kind of action we’re taking,” the official said. “This is one of the most well-discussed, well-signaled actions in the history of trade actions.”

The Trump administration, in January, approved safeguard tariffs on imported large residential washing machines and solar cells.

The official said Thursday that there is language in the proclamation outlining “security relationships” with countries around the globe, and noted that “they will be welcome to discuss” with the U.S. “alternate ways” to tariff the imports.

Officials said that Mexico and Canada would be exempt from the tariffs during NAFTA negotiations. The president, himself, has hinted at other exemptions.

“If that [NAFTA] negotiation is unsuccessful then tariffs will be applied across the board,” Peter Navarro, the director of the White House National Trade Council, told Fox News. “Now, importantly, in addition to that, there is language that will allow other countries to effectively propose ways that they could get a similar dispensation in exchange for more fair and reciprocal trade with the United States.”

But the 25 percent and 10 percent levels should not be seen as firm, officials said. Navarro added that if Canada, Mexico, or any other country is eventually granted an exemption, then tariffs would be raised for all other countries affected.

The president, himself, has said the U.S. would be “very fair.”

“[We’re] sticking with 10 and 25 percent initially,” Trump said during a Cabinet meeting on Thursday. “I’ll have a right to go up or down, depending on the country.”

Trump added, though, “We’re going to be very flexible.”

Navarro told Fox News that the president was not using the tariffs as a “bargaining chip,” but noted that “any country that is allowed to be removed from the tariffs would result in higher tariffs for everybody else.”

“So we still maintain a level of protection in defense of the aluminum and steel industries,” Navarro said.

The White House said that “key sectors” of steel and aluminum industries have faced “long-term downward trends in employment.” The White House said employment in iron and steel mills has dropped by more than 54,000 since 2000. The aluminum industry has cut more than 40,000 jobs in the same time period.

“The decline of American steel and aluminum production has resulted in extensive job losses for hardworking Americans in industries critical to our national security and economic well-being,” the White House said Thursday, noting that despite “considerable growth in demand,” six primary aluminum smelters have permanently shut down since 2012.

Fox News' Adam Shaw, John Roberts, Kristin Brown and Serafin Gomez contributed to this report.

A group of nongovernmental organisations called on the Trump administration to clarify its policy on drone use, saying they are concerned about reported changes to US rules and a lack of transparency in the decision-making process.

"We are deeply concerned that the reported new policy, combined with this administration's reported dramatic increase in lethal operations in Yemen and Somalia, will add to an increase in unlawful killings and in civilian casualties," a joint statement said.

The organisations include Amnesty International, the US-based Center for Constitutional Rights, Human Rights Watch, the ACLU and others.

President Donald Trump signed the 2018 National Defense Authorization Act in December. The act funds the US military but also requires Trump to make known to Congress any changes to previous drone policies by March 12.

The statement detailed alleged changes in policy, which are reported to have been made to Obama-era guidelines but have not been confirmed by the current government.

The Trump administration, embroiled in scandals and resignations, has not signalled it will make changes to drone policy known.

Concerning relaxations

The reported changes include a relaxing of the "imminent threat requirement", which means the US may select targets outside of armed conflict, the standard of requiring "near certainty" that the target is present, and an increased role for the CIA.

Daniel Mahanty, director of the US programme for the Center for Civilians in Conflict, told Al Jazeera these "changes, and the fact that the administration refuses to make them public, should concern Americans and the many countries upon which the US depends for cooperation and support".

Furthermore, the relaxations "increase the risk that more civilians will lose their lives or livelihoods with very little recourse to pursue any meaningful remedy", Mahanty said.

According to Airwars - a watchdog group that tracks "airpower-dominated international military actions" - there was a nearly 50-percent increase in drone strikes in Iraq and Syria, while civilian deaths rose roughly 215 percent from 2016 to 2017.

In Somalia, where American drones are active, the US killed more than 200 people in 2017, according to the Bureau of Investigative Journalism.

The US' latest drone strike took place in Yemen on Tuesday. The attack killed four people said to be linked to al-Qaeda in Hadramout province, China's Xinhua news agency reported.

Targeting Yemen

{articleGUID}

Yemen has been the epicentre for US drone raids since the Obama administration. Trump has continued that policy, rights group say.



"Last year alone, President Trump carried out more than three times as many strikes in Yemen as Obama, and authorised two raids that killed almost a dozen children and a Navy SEAL," Jennifer Gibson, head of the assassinations programme at Reprieve - one of the signatories of the joint statement, told Al Jazeera.

While watchdog groups try to keep track of drone attacks, it is often difficult to confirm circumstances or death tolls in war-torn areas.

US armed forces and intelligence services have been accused of hiding details and doctoring numbers to make drone strikes appear more accurate.

Former CIA director John Brennan said in June 2011 "there hasn't been a single collateral death" in Pakistan for more than a year. The claim was widely disputed.

Drone policy, including who and where the president can kill, "should not remain hidden in the shadows", said Gibson.

article

Trade ministers from 11 Pacific Rim countries signed a sweeping free trade agreement Thursday to streamline trade and slash tariffs on the same day that President Donald Trump was expected to formalize new tariffs on aluminum and steel to protect U.S. producers.

Continue Reading Below

Trump withdrew the U.S. from the Trans-Pacific Partnership last year, causing fears that it would not prosper without its most influential country. But the remaining 11 members pressed ahead, saying they were showing resolve against protectionism through global trade.

The ministers dropped key provisions that the Americans had required on protection of intellectual property, among others. The renegotiated pact signed in Chile's capital was also renamed the Comprehensive and Progressive Trans-Pacific Partnership, or CPTPP.

The pact that covers 500 million people includes Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam. Its success highlights the isolation of the U.S. under Trump's protectionist rhetoric on trade and his "America first" philosophy.

"It leaves the U.S. at a disadvantage from both a trade and a broader strategic perspective," said Joshua Meltzer, senior fellow in the global economy and development program at the Brookings Institution. "It is now a trade bloc that discriminates against the U.S."

Meltzer said the United States' ability to shape the rules of trade in the Asia-Pacific region "is very much diminished."

The U.S., originally the biggest TPP economy, was one of the trade deal's strongest supporters before Trump took office. Trump has said he prefers country-to-country deals and is seeking to renegotiate several major trade agreements, including the North American Free Trade Agreement that includes the U.S., Mexico and Canada.

This is "a strong sign against the protectionist pressures, and in favor of a world open to free trade, without unilateral sanctions and the threat of trade wars," Chilean Foreign Minister Heraldo Munoz said.

The European Union said this week that it is ready to retaliate against Trump's tariffs — of 25 percent on imported steel and 10 percent on aluminum imports — with counter-measures against iconic U.S. products like Harley Davidson motorcycles, Levi's jeans and bourbon.

The EU threat and Trump's impending announcement on the tariffs were expected to escalate the risk of a trade war, in which nations try to punish each other by hiking taxes on traded goods. Experts say that tends to harm both exporting nations as well as importing countries' consumers, who face higher costs.

The EU considers itself to be caught in the crossfire of a trade dispute, in which Trump has mainly singled out China for being unfair in its commercial deals.

The original TPP was conceived by the U.S. as a counterweight to China's growing economic influence through a robust trading bloc that excluded the Asian giant. The thinking was that China would have an incentive to open its market and liberalize its policies in an effort to eventually qualify for TPP membership.

"Without the United States, it doesn't serve that purpose," said Edward Alden, senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. "It becomes a modest liberalization measure."

China's foreign minister, Wang Yi, commented Thursday on the deal before it was signed.

"China did not participate in the CPTPP Agreement. However, China has always been a staunch supporter of trade liberalization and an important participant in Asia-Pacific regional cooperation and economic integration," Wang Yi said at a news conference.

"Of course, we also hope that the various free trade arrangements in the Asia-Pacific region will be able to communicate and coordinate with each other and form a benign interaction, playing a constructive role in their respective fields in resisting trade protectionism and building an open world economy."

___

Associated Press writer Eva Vergara reported this story in Santiago and AP writer Luis Andres Henao reported from Buenos Aires, Argentina. AP writers Paul Wiseman in Washington and Joe McDonald in Beijing contributed to this report.

Islamabad, Pakistan - At least 20 members of the Pakistani Taliban, including the son of Tehreek-e-Taliban Pakistan (TTP) chief Mullah Fazlullah, have been killed in a US drone strike in the northeastern Afghan province of Kunar, according to a Taliban statement.

The fighters, including Abdullah, were killed in a strike on a TTP camp, the group said in a statement texted to local journalists in Pakistan's Bajaur district, which borders Kunar, on Wednesday.

According to the statement, 20 fidayeen, or suicide bombers, were killed, while another six fighters were wounded in the strike.

Prominent TTP commander Gul Muhammad and fidayeen trainer Yaseen were also killed in the strike, Pakistani newspaper Dawn reported.

Pakistan has often accused US and Afghan forces of not doing enough to target TTP forces resident on the Afghan side of the volatile Pakistan-Afghanistan border, where they fled following a series of military operations by Pakistan.

While violence has dropped in recent years, the TTP and its affiliates continue to carry out sporadic large-scale attacks targeting Pakistani security forces and civilians.

Violence casualties

At least 748 civilians and security forces were killed in violence perpetrated by the TTP and other armed groups, included armed Baloch separatists, in 2017, down from a peak of at least 3,739 in 2012, according to the South Asia Terrorism Portal, a New Delhi based research organisation.

Pakistan's military says that it has killed at least 4,000 fighters working for the TTP and its allies since 2013.

Al Jazeera is unable to independently verify that number, as access to the conflict areas is strictly controlled, and the identities of those killed are seldom revealed.

Pakistani Foreign Secretary Tehmina Janjua is in Washington DC this week for talks with the US aimed at lowering tensions between the two erstwhile allies.

In January, US President Donald Trump cut more than $1.1bn in military assistance to Pakistan over allegations that it was providing safe haven to members of the Afghan Taliban and Haqqani Network.

Pakistan denies the charges, alleging that it is being scapegoated for the failure of US-led coalition forces to secure Afghanistan after more than 16 years of war.

Recent diplomatic contacts appear to be softening the divide between the two countries.

On Monday, senior US State Department official Alice Wells said the US recognised that Pakistan had "legitimate concerns" regarding the situation in Afghanistan.

"They have concerns over border management; over the [Pakistani Taliban's] presence in ungoverned space in Afghanistan; refugee concerns," she said.

Additional reporting by Hameedullah Khan in Islamabad.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption 'Thundersnow' hits the US East Coast.

Thousands of people were left without power as a storm brought more than 2ft (60cm) of snow to the US east coast.

More than 800,000 customers were without electricity, including some who have been without power since last Friday's powerful winter storm.

Heavy snow and icy roads prompted officials to close schools and cancel or delay thousands of flights across the region.

It is the second storm to hit the US East Coast in less than a week.

More snow and wind gusts of up to 55 miles (88km/h) were expected to stretch across eastern New York through northern Maine on Thursday.

Up to 18 inches (45cm) of snow could fall on northern New England, according to the National Weather Service.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Motorists warned to stay off roads due to whiteout conditions

At least one death has been blamed on the storm. An 88-year-old woman died after she was struck by a falling tree in Suffern, New York, according to the Journal News newspaper.

Amtrak rail operator suspended service between New York City and Boston until 11:00 local time (16:00 GMT) on Thursday, according to the company.

Dozens of routes had also been cancelled and residents were advised to avoid travel unless necessary. More than 2,000 flights were cancelled as of Wednesday night, according to flight-tracking website FlightAware.

Boston Public Schools cancelled classes on Thursday and officials declared snow emergencies in several Massachusetts communities, according to the Boston Globe newspaper.

"With snow removal efforts underway, motorists are asked to stay off roads, stay home and stay safe", the Boston Police Department said on Twitter.

The governors of New Jersey and Pennsylvania declared states of emergency, allowing for release of government funds for recovery and redevelopment operations if necessary.

The Northeastern University women's basketball team was forced to push their bus out of the snow after it was stalled in Philadelphia. The team posted a video of the effort on Twitter.

The dense snow, icy roads and powerful winds were not as treacherous as last Friday's storm that toppled trees, flooded coastal areas and left more than two million homes and businesses without power from Virginia to Maine. At least nine people were also killed in the storm.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption A downed branch in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania

Approximately 100,000 people were still without power after last week's storm, and efforts to install their power were stalled as the second storm swept through the region.

Most power outages were in New Jersey, Connecticut, Pennsylvania, Massachusetts and New York.

Leaked emails show that a businessman with ties to the United Arab Emirates (UAE) tried to convince US President Donald Trump to fire Secretary of State Rex Tillerson for not supporting the UAE-backed blockade of Qatar, the BBC reported.

According to the emails obtained by the news outlet, Elliott Broidy, who is also a major Trump fundraiser, met President Donald Trump in October 2017 and lobbied against the top US diplomat for "performing poorly".

The emails appear to confirm earlier reports of the existence of a memo by Broidy, allegedly confirming attempts to implement US policies in favour of the UAE.

Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Egypt and Bahrain severed diplomatic and transport ties with Qatar on June 5, accusing it of supporting "terrorism". Qatar has repeatedly rejected the allegations as "baseless".

Tillerson criticised urged Saudi Arabia and other Gulf and Arab states to ease the blockade, which contradicted what appeared to be Trump's initial support for the move.

In the emails, Broidy calls Tillerson "a tower of Jello" and says the secretary of state "needs to be slammed", the BBC reported.

He also criticises Qatar, calling it a "television station with a country". Broidy has been a vocal opponent of Al Jazeera.

Broidy says Trump thought it was a "good idea" to schedule a meeting with Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, the crown prince of Abu Dhabi.

A spokesman for Broidy told US media that the businessman has "reason to believe" Qatar hacked his emails. Qatar denied the allegations.

According to the New York Times, Broidy owns a company that has hundreds of millions of dollars in contracts with the UAE.

Mueller investigation

{articleGUID}

Emails regarding Broidy's meeting with Trump were sent to George Nader, a Lebanese-American businessman and adviser to the de facto ruler of the UAE.

{articleGUID}

According to the New York Times, Nader was questioned by Special Counsel Robert Mueller about his ties to the UAE and his meetings with White House officials.

Nader was asked "for information about any possible attempts by the Emiratis to buy political influence by directing money to support Mr Trump during the presidential campaign, according to people who knowledge of the discussions," the newspaper reported earlier this week.

Mueller is investigating alleged Russian interference in the US 2016 presidential elections.

Nader, who is described as a White House regular, allegedly took part in discussions of American foreign policy in the Gulf region with then-chief strategist Stephen Bannon and senior adviser Jared Kushner, who is also Trump's son-in-law, shortly after Trump took office.

Analysts say the reports show the extent of influence the UAE may have in Washington.

"It seems as though the Emiratis have invested so much," Mohammed Cherkaoui, a professor at George Washington University, told Al Jazeera.

"There is now this overconfidence they can have their way in the US administration," he said.

"What is alarming is not an act of regular or natural lobbying that is part of the game in Washington, but that you have two agents trying to establish a direct link between Trump and Mohammed bin Zayed."

The Washington Post reported last month that four countries, including the UAE, may have attempted to exploit Kushner's lack of experience and his family's business debt to influence the US administration's policies.

The Prosecutor General of Ukraine has launched an investigation into claims surrounding an alleged multi-million dollar lobbying contract that names one of US President Donald Trump's most influential fundraisers, Elliott Broidy.

The 12-page document, which appears to have been signed by Broidy, outlines his role as providing "political advocacy" on behalf of a now sanctioned Russian bank, VTB.

The deal was apparently dated June 12, 2014, just weeks before VTB Bank was blacklisted by the United States and European Union as a key Kremlin asset following Russia's invasion of Crimea. Russian President Vladimir Putin is guest of honour at VTB Bank's investor conference every year.

The document raises serious questions about whether Broidy is in breach of the US Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA), a law that has gained prominence following the investigation of special counsel Robert Mueller into foreign meddling in the 2016 presidential election. Former Trump campaign chairman Paul Manafort and his aide Rick Gates have both been charged as a result of their work in Ukraine.

The document, obtained by Al Jazeera's Investigative Unit, also suggests that Broidy, a national deputy finance chairman of the Republican National Committee, would provide the same services to Investment Capital Ukraine (ICU), a Ukraine brokerage that has acted as financial advisors to President Petro Poroshenko.

"If this is a bonafide document, it is very troubling," says the Washington-based organisation Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington (CREW).

"Broidy appears to be an unregistered agent of a foreign principal in violation of federal law," says spokesman Jordan Libowitz.

US law requires American citizens involved in lobbying on behalf of foreign governments or parties to register with the US Department of Justice on their Foreign Registered Agents (FARA) database. Al Jazeera found no evidence that Broidy is registered despite mounting evidence of multiple foreign clients.

Details of the alleged consultancy first emerged in Ukraine in January. The files were handed to Ukraine's Prosecutor General, who has ordered the Kiev Prosecutor's office to investigate further.

Ukraine's Institute of Law and Society submitted the documents to authorities, and the reform group is now calling for a thorough investigation in both Ukraine and the US.

The document outlines the work to be undertaken by Broidy, which includes "regular political and business analysis, political advocacy, investment advice, and money management" to VTB Bank and ICU.

The consultancy work was apparently to be paid in five annual payments of $2.5m from an offshore company, Quillas Equities SA, which is registered in the British Virgin Islands, but with an address in Dubai. According to the Panama Papers, a massive leak of offshore documentation, Quillas Equities SA's shareholder is Yuri Soloviev, chairman of VTB Bank.

The document names Broidy as a consultant who has "many years of investment banking and money management experience." It goes on to detail his "expertise in international investments and American politics."

The alleged agreement outlines Broidy's background in Republican politics, describing how he served "as Finance Chair of the Republican Party and has access to US politicians and government agencies."

The business and lobbying activities of this prominent Republican are coming under increasing scrutiny beyond Ukraine.

Last week a group calling itself LA Confidential leaked emails that appeared to show Broidy and his wife Robin Rosenzweig, deputy finance chair of the Republican National Committee, asking for more than $75m to quash an investigation in the US into a multibillion-dollar fraud in Malaysia.

Further revelations came from The New York Times, which reported that Broidy has a lucrative defence contract with the United Arab Emirates (UAE) and that he had lobbied President Trump to meet privately with Crown Prince Mohammed bin Zayed al-Nahyan, the leader of the UAE. The emails suggest he has direct access to the US President.

Romanian media have also reported Broidy's role in negotiating arms deals worth potentially millions of dollars.

In 2009, Broidy pleaded guilty in New York to bribing New York state pension officials with almost $1m in return for their $250m investment in an Israel-focused investment fund he helped to manage.

He and the firm paid over $30m in fines; however, the charges against Broidy were downgraded, and he avoided jail.

Now, Broidy claims he is the victim of a "hack" and smear campaign orchestrated by the state of Qatar in response to his criticism of the Gulf state's record against terrorism, a charge that Qatar denies.

Amid long-standing regional rivalries, the UAE, along with Saudi Arabia, Egypt and Bahrain, has imposed a nine-month-long siege on Qatar. Broidy has close financial ties to the UAE and its royal family.

Broidy's wider links with the Middle East are now reportedly of interest in the FBI's far-reaching probe into foreign influence in US politics, which are mostly focused on Paul Manafort. Breaches of the Foreign Agents Registration Act form a key part of this investigation.

'Confidential MOU'

A second document appears to expose further connections with the UAE. It outlines a plan for ICU and an Abu Dhabi based company to invest $40m into a fund to be managed by Broidy. The same group also handed what is described as a "Confidential Memorandum of Understanding" to prosecutors in Ukraine.

The Abu Dhabi firm and ICU apparently agreed to provide 80 percent of the investment, including an initial $3.5m payment.

It is unclear as to what the $40m was to be used for. This alleged MOU states that the deal was effective from December 2014, but omits specific details on how the money would be invested. It is also not clear if it was ever completed as the paperwork is unsigned.

Broidy owns a security company, which is run by former US military personnel and provides services to governments in the Middle East. Its services include conducting "specialised operations, infrastructure protection and training."

Broidy, a Los Angeles-based financier and seasoned political operator, has raised millions of dollars in donations for the Republican Party. He is tipped to be a key part of Trump's campaign team for 2020.

In a response to these claims, ICU denies that the company, or its affiliates, has had any relationship with Broidy or his company and describes the contracts as being part of an elaborate forgery.

{articleGUID}

"We believe they are part of a malicious fraud against us," they told Al Jazeera in a statement.

VTB Bank also denied dealing with the Republican Party fundraiser. "Yuri Soloviev is not acquainted with Elliott Broidy and has never had any business dealings with him."

Al Jazeera also approached Broidy for comment during the preparation of this article. However, no response was received.

Al Jazeera obtained the documents as part of a one-year investigation into corruption involving Eastern European oligarchs, which also revealed a massive off-shore corruption network linked to former Ukrainian President Viktor Yanukovych.

<a href="https://www.documentcloud.org/public/search/document%3A%204403331%20document%3A%204403338%20document%3A%204404667%20document%3A%204403334%20document%3A%204403333%20document%3A%204404887%20document%3A%204404888%20document%3A%204404890">View/search document collection</a>

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption It is not clear exactly which video games the White House holds responsible for violent behaviour

US President Donald Trump is to meet video games company representatives on Thursday to discuss violent content.

The meeting comes in the wake of last month's shooting at a school in Florida in which 17 people died.

The president has in the past expressed the view that violent games were "shaping young people's thoughts".

But the games industry has defended itself, saying there is no evidence to suggest a link between violent games and real-life violent actions.

The Electronic Software Association (ESA), which represents the games industry in the US, said it would be attending.

"The upcoming meeting at the White House will provide the opportunity to have a fact-based conversation about video game ratings, our industry’s commitment to parents, and the tools we provide to make informed entertainment choices," it said in a statement.

Also at the meeting will be the Entertainment Software Rating Board (ESRB), the organisation responsible for offering age and content guidance for games.

Critics of the industry will include Brent Bozell from the Media Research Center. He has frequently called for a reduction of violence in games.

Other attendees include:

Strauss Zelnick, chief executive of Rockstar Games - the maker of the Grand Theft Auto series

Robert Altman, chief executive of ZeniMax Media, which owns Doom, Fallout and Wolfenstein-maker Bethesda

Lt Col Dave Grossman, author of Assassination Generation: Video Games, Aggression, and the Psychology of Killing

Melissa Henson, a mother from the Parents Television Council

Few official details about the meeting have been provided by the White House, but press secretary Sarah Sanders said violence in games was "certainly something that should be looked at and something that we want to have the conversation about".

Ms Sanders announced the meeting last week - a complete surprise to gaming industry figures, who at that point had not received any information or invitations.

The BBC understands the meeting will begin at 14:00 ET (19:00 GMT).

'Creating monsters!'

On several occasions, President Trump has pointed to video game violence as being a problem potentially affecting American youths.

"Video game violence & glorification must be stopped," he wrote on Twitter in December 2012.

"It is creating monsters!"

The games industry has routinely and robustly defended itself against claims its products provoke real-life violence.

“Video games are enjoyed around the world and numerous authorities and reputable scientific studies have found no connection between games and real-life violence," the ESA said in a statement.

"Like all Americans, we are deeply concerned about the level of gun violence in the United States. Video games are plainly not the issue: entertainment is distributed and consumed globally, but the US has an exponentially higher level of gun violence than any other nation."

In 2011, the US Supreme Court overruled a California law that banned the sale of certain violent games to children without parental supervision. It deemed games to be speech protected by the US constitution's First Amendment.

However, in making its ruling, the court did say the issue might warrant closer examination at a later date.

The meeting is not the first to take place between the White House and the games industry in the wake of a school shooting.

In 2013, following the death of 20 pre-school children and six staff members at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut, the vice-president at the time, Joe Biden, met games representatives from firms such as Electronic Arts and Epic.

Mr Biden said games companies were not being "singled out" and there was no "silver bullet" when it came to solving the issue. He said there was no good data either way to support or disprove claims that games violence provoked real actions.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption The US is planning tariffs on metals - but may be hit in kind by other countries

Some countries may be exempt from US plans to impose tariffs on metal imports, the White House has announced.

The exemptions - on national security grounds - included Canada and Mexico, spokeswoman Sarah Sanders said.

Reports, however, suggested the apparent softening of the US stance would last for only 30 days.

US President Donald Trump has said steel products will face a 25% tariff, with 10% on aluminium goods. He is expected to sign the plan on Thursday.

Mr Trump tweeted on Thursday morning that he was "looking forward" to a meeting later in the day on the matter.

Meanwhile, China threatened an "appropriate and necessary response" in any trade war with the US.

Foreign Minister Wang Yi said China and the US should strive to be partners rather than rivals.

The EU has proposed retaliatory measures against a number of US goods including bourbon and peanut butter.

Despite opposition at home and abroad, Ms Sanders said the US president would sign the measures in by the end of the week.

But she added: "There are potential carve-outs for Mexico and Canada based on national security, and possibly other countries as well based on that process. That would be [on] a case-by-case and country by country basis."

President Trump has previously suggested that planned tariffs for Canada and Mexico could be abandoned if a "new and fair" North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) is signed.

White House trade policy adviser Peter Navarro said on Wednesday that the tariffs would start in 15 to 30 days' time and there would be "a clause that does not impose these tariffs immediately on Canada and Mexico". Both countries knew the president was not "messing around in this", he added.

Why is Mr Trump doing this?

Mr Trump has railed against the US trade deficit, arguing that other countries have been "taking advantage of" the US for decades.

One of his campaign promises was to rebuild the US steel and aluminium industries which he said has suffered "disgraceful" treatment from other countries, in particular cheap Chinese imports.

Last week he dismissed concerns he could trigger a trade war, instead saying "trade wars are good" and were something the US would easily win.

Mr Trump has already hinted he could drop plans to impose tariffs on Mexican and Canadian metals but linked it to the US getting a better deal in the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta).

Mexico and Canada are among the main suppliers of steel to the US.

What's the reaction been?

The US plans have sparked worldwide alarm and jolted stock markets.

Critics argue that the tariffs would fail to protect American jobs and would ultimately raise prices for consumers.

More than 100 Republicans on Wednesday signed a letter addressed to the president, expressing their "deep concern" about the tariffs.

The letter referenced a sweeping tax cuts bill Congress and the White House worked to pass last year, arguing that "adding new taxes in the form of broad tariffs would undermine the remarkable progress".

International Monetary Fund chief Christine Lagarde warned "nobody wins" in a trade war, saying it would harm global economic growth.

The EU has set out tit-for-tat plans to impose import duties on bourbon, peanut butter, cranberries, orange juice, steel, and industrial products. Other countries are also considering retaliatory steps.

Members of Mr Trump's Republican party are concerned too, with House Speaker Paul Ryan saying he wanted to see tariffs that were "more surgical and more targeted".

Tuesday saw the departure of top White House economic advisor Gary Cohn, who is a strong supporter of free trade.
