
Muslim-American leaders have been arrested at the US Capitol while urging Congress to stand against President Donald Trump's effort to end a programme that protects certain young immigrants.

Omar Suleiman, Dawud Walid, Mujahid Fletcher, Talib Shareef and Nihad Awad of the Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR), Zahra Billoo, and Linda Sarsour advocated immigration reform before getting arrested on Monday.

The protesters participated in an act of civil disobedience at the office of the Speaker of the House of Representatives, Paul Ryan, demanding that he meet them to hear their concerns.

LIVE from @SpeakerRyan's office where Jewish and Muslim faith leaders have joined efforts to demand a #DreamActNow. https://t.co/rI5A6IXj5f — CWS #DREAMACTNOW (@CWS_global) March 5, 2018

Dreamers

Demonstrations have taken place in major cities across the US in support of the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) programme that protects young undocumented immigrants from deportations.

Fletcher, who also came to the US as a child from Columbia, said he shared the experience of the Dreamers, people who came into the US illegally as children.

"We don't want to live based on fear. We want to live according to the principles of freedom of speech, of religion," he said.

Trump has long desired to end renewal applications for the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals (DACA) programme. Its recipients, known as the Dreamers, were thrown into legal uncertainty after Trump moved last year to end the programme, which protects hundreds of thousands of Dreamers.

Trump gave legislators until yesterday, March 5 to come up with a replacement, before a Supreme Court ruling delayed that deadline for as much as a year.

He has been locked in bitter negotiations with Democrats about replacing the programme in exchange for a raft of immigration overhauls that would end other avenues of legal immigration.

#MuslimsForDream

Quoting Malcolm X, Talib Shareef of the Muslim Alliance of North America said: "Almighty Allah has told us to stand for justice. We are not weak in faith and we are here for a mobilization.

"We stand here in the spirit of Malcolm X with the people who are affected by these policies."

"This is creating real fear," Suleiman said, adding that the imams are fighting white supremacy because Islamophobia, racism and hostility against immigrants all stem from the same roots.

The illegal immigrants brought to the U.S. as children – known as Dreamers – say that they have been failed by Democrats who are more interested in blaming President Trump and Republicans than delivering a congressional measure that would protect the young people from deportation as they await a path to legal residency.

Dreamers are done giving Dems a pass.

“They don’t walk their talk,” said Cata Santiago, a 20-year-old Dreamer who was brought to the U.S. from Mexico when she was just 8 years old. “We’re tired of it. We’re tired of believing them when they say ‘It’s the Republicans.’ They make promises when they’re in an election, and when it’s over they’re done and don’t do anything.”

“I’ve decided to put my faith in my community [of Dreamers] and not in the Democrats,” Santiago told Fox News.

We're tired of believing [Democrats] when they say 'It's the Republicans.' They make promises when they're in an election, and when it's over they're done and don't do anything. - Cata Santiago, Dreamer

On Monday, when a program that temporarily shields such immigrants from deportation had been set to end, Dreamers held a sit-in at the national headquarters of the Democratic National Committee in Washington, D.C., to shine a spotlight on what the youths describe as the Democrats’ betrayal of them.

“The Democrats made the calculation to kick the can down the road and allow hundreds of thousands of us undocumented youth to live in uncertainty,” said Maria Duarte, one of the participants, in a statement. “We are anxious and we are scared of being torn away from our homes and our community.”

Many Dreamers say they are urging their supporters to suspend their affiliations with the Democratic Party until they see evidence that members of Congress who have portrayed themselves as working on a solution to their undocumented status are doing more than just making promises and giving reassurances.

Members of the Seed Project, a part of the Movimiento Cosecha (or the Harvest Movement), which advocates for undocumented immigrants, say they are determined “to continue to expose the Democrats’ false promises.”

In the short term, many want an extension of the program, a 2012 initiative by President Barack Obama called the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals, or DACA. But what they most want is a permanent fix – congressional legislation that would give them a way to legalize their status in the only country many of these young people truly consider home.

Last year Trump said he would end the program and gave Congress six months to come up with a permanent fix, but bipartisan bickering has stalled various efforts to come up with a bill.

Some 800,000 immigrants received DACA, which allowed recipients to obtain work permits, driver’s licenses and some government benefits.

Two federal courts ordered the Trump administration to continue accepting DACA renewal applications.

Democrats relinquished the leverage they had for meaningful legislation...[they] aren't fooling anyone. - Cesar Vargas, immigration activist, civil rights attorney

Many Dreamers have blamed Democrats, particularly Sen. Chuck Schumer of New York, for boasting about having plans that will result in legislation to benefit Dreamers, but then letting the ball drop by failing to push assertively for the youths, or by refusing to compromise for the sake of political optics.

“Democrats relinquished the leverage they had for meaningful legislation,” wrote Cesar Vargas, a civil rights attorney who has advocated for immigrant causes, in an opinion piece in the Huffington Post.

Democrats, Vargas said, “aren’t fooling anyone.”

“Democrats have no plan, and once again, Schumer, now the minority leader, is showing that protecting these immigrants…was never his priority,” he said. “The lack of leadership by Democrats, however, is nothing new. In 2009, they controlled the White House and Congress and still failed to bring up immigration reform for a vote.”

The DNC maintains that it is the only party that the Dreamers can count on.

DNC National Press Secretary Michael Tyler said to Fox News: "The Democratic Party is the only party that is standing with and committed to protecting Dreamers. Our Democratic President Barack Obama established DACA to provide relief for Dreamers because Congress failed to act."

"And now, Donald Trump has rescinded DACA to pander to his base all at the expense of Dreamers," Tyler said. "Democrats have put countless proposals on the table, and yet this president and Republican Congress refuse to take action."

Many Dreamers say that their disappointment in Democrats is nothing new, and goes back some 17 years.

In 2010, they say, Congress seemed close to passing a Dream Act when it passed in the House of Representatives, only to have it fail in the Senate after five Democrats voted against the measure.

The frustration directed at Democrats, the critics say, does not mean that they don’t blame Republicans for the Dreamers’ uncertain future.

But it’s the Democrats, they say, who have gone out of their way to depict themselves as their only hope on immigration efforts that will give them a chance to legalize their status. Obama did the same, many note, when he was running his presidential campaigns, only to end up presiding over a record number of deportations. They feel used.

The Democratic Party is the only party that is standing with and committed to protecting Dreamers...Donald Trump has rescinded DACA to pander to his base all at the expense of Dreamers. - Democratic National Committee spokesman Michael Tyler

“We’re done speaking to the Democrats behind closed doors and trusting them,” Santiago said, “everything is going to happen out in the open.”

Rev. Gabriel Salguero, president of the National Latino Evangelical Coalition, remembers taking political leaders to his churches around the country in 2010 to build momentum for Dreamer legislation.

“There’s been a lack of political will,” Salguero said to Fox News. “This is beyond partisanship, it’s a leadership issue. These kids trusted the process. We told them ‘If you play by the rules, if you wait, if you come forward, it will happen.’ They did everything that was asked of them. I understand their frustration.”

President Trump and lawmakers are still struggling to come up with a plan for the hundreds of thousands of young, undocumented immigrants living in the United States.

In September, the Trump administration announced its plan to phase out the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program (DACA) – which provides a level of amnesty to certain undocumented immigrants, many of whom came to the U.S. as children – with a six-month delay for recipients.

Trump set a deadline of March 5 as the end date for the DACA program, but a lower court ordered the administration to continue to accept renewal applications indefinitely. The U.S. Supreme Court declined in late February to take up the administration's request for an appeal of the order that requires the continuing acceptance of renewal applications.

The Department of Homeland Security has confirmed that it is continuing to process renewal requests but is not accepting new ones.

Here’s a look at the DACA program and why the Trump administration wants to dismantle it.

What is the DACA program?

The DACA program was formed through executive action by former President Barack Obama in 2012 and allowed certain people who came to the U.S. illegally as minors to be protected from immediate deportation. Recipients, called Dreamers, were able to request “consideration of deferred action” for a period of two years, which was subject to renewal.

“Deferred action is a use of prosecutorial discretion to defer removal action against an individual for a certain period of time,” U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services stated. “Deferred action does not provide lawful status.”

Individuals were able to request DACA status if they were under the age of 31 on June 15, 2012, came to the U.S. before turning 16 and continuously lived in the country since June 15, 2007.

Individuals also had to have a high school diploma, GED certification, been honorably discharged from the military or still be in school. Recipients could not have a criminal record.

It did not provide “legal status.”

How many people are affected by DACA?

Nearly 800,000 undocumented youth are under the program's umbrella.

Thousands of people could lose their jobs if the DACA program is rescinded permanently, according to a study by left-leaning think tank Center for American Progress.

Daniel Garza, president of the conservative immigration nonprofit Libre Initiative, told Fox News that DACA offers a “reprieve from a life of uncertainty for innocent kids who didn’t break the law.”

“It’s rather disappointing to think they could return to a state of anxiety and fear,” he said.

What did the Trump administration do?

The Trump administration announced in September 2017 that it planned to phase out DACA for current recipients, and no new requests would be granted. But a lower court order requires the administration to continue accepting renewal applications for those under the DACA program, and the Supreme Court rejected the Trump administration's request to intervene.

While the courts’ decisions have relieved much of the urgency surrounding the March 5 deadline, there are nearly 22,000 people whose initial applications have yet to be decided and are at risk until their petitions are granted.

DHS confirmed that it is still processing renewal applications as normal but is not accepting new DACA applications from individuals who did not already have it, the department said in a statement.

Since the announcement, Trump has offered to work with lawmakers on a solution for the hundreds of thousands of people in the U.S. who fell under DACA’s umbrella of protections. But he has also repeatedly blamed Democrats on social media for lack of a solution.

Earlier this year, Trump released his “four pillars” of immigration reform, which included a provision for legal status for DACA recipients and others who would be eligible for DACA status. The White House estimated that total to be 1.8 million people. The Senate rejected the plan.

Republicans – and some Democrats – opposed Obama’s directive establishing DACA from the start as a perceived overreach of executive power.

Obama spoke out on social media after the Trump administration announced a plan to dismantle the program, stating that it's "self-defeating ... and it is cruel" to end DACA and questioned the motive behind the decision.

Do any DACA recipients serve in the military?

Despite some rumors circulating online to the contrary, Dreamers were eligible to serve in the U.S. military since 2014 when the Pentagon adopted a policy to allow a certain amount of undocumented immigrants to join.

In fiscal year 2016, 359 DACA recipients had enlisted in the Army – which is the only branch to accept immigrants of this category.

A Department of Defense official said in April that the military would continue to accept noncitizen recruits, but it is unclear if that will continue to be the case.

Fox News' John Roberts and The Associated Press contributed to this report.

Democrats are threatening to shut down the federal government, refusing to pass a spending bill unless it contains a path to legal status for the so-called “Dreamers” protected under President Obama’s DACA (Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals) program.

Are the Democrats really concerned with the status of these young people brought to the U.S. illegally as children, or with reforming our broken immigration system? No. They are trying to score political points.

Let’s review:

Sen. Dick Durbin, D-Ill., recently went to a closed-door meeting at the White House to push his immigration plan. He was so genuinely intent on getting a bipartisan deal done to save the Dreamers that he torpedoed the entire undertaking by running to the microphones and claiming President Trump’s made a “racist” comment about “s---hole” countries.

Does that make any sense? No, it does not.

Durbin knew full well when he made his accusation that President Trump used such vulgar language that a media firestorm would be unleashed. He was betting that if the talks broke down, and Congress failed to resolve the Dreamer issue, President Trump would be blamed.

That, to Durbin and his Democratic colleagues – Senate Minority Leader Chuck Schumer of New York and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi of California – is much, much more important than actually lifting the cloud of uncertainty that hovers over the heads of the so-called Dreamers.

Here is the reality: Democrats are scared to death that a Republican Congress and a Republican president may actually effect some reform of our flawed immigration system. They have pursued the Hispanic community vigorously for many years, seeking to solidify their support within the country’s fastest growing demographic.

Part of the Democratic strategy has been to demonize the GOP as racist and anti-immigrant. Trump’s candidacy and his careless comments about Mexicans greased the skids.

In their eagerness to curry favor with Hispanics, Democrats have increasingly abandoned their earlier professed support for secure borders. Though they continue to pay lip service to protecting against illegal immigration, many have opposed the use of E-verify and other approaches that might reduce the allure of entering the U.S. without authorization.

The Democrats have also encouraged the spread of sanctuary cities, where local governments limit their cooperation with federal officials on the enforcement of U.S. immigration laws. And they just hate Trump’s proposed wall along our southern border.

Now many Democrats are insisting they will not vote for a spending bill needed to keep government operating beyond Friday night unless it includes a lopsided DACA fix proposed by Senators Durbin and Lindsey Graham, R-S.C., which allows Dreamers a path to legal status but skimps on border enforcement.

Though nearly everyone supports protecting Dreamers against deportation, Republicans and the White House want to couple that with enhanced border security, to make sure that what some are calling “amnesty” does not result in great numbers of new people flooding in without permission.

Democrats are taking a risk. Most Americans are compassionate and welcoming to immigrants, recognizing the invaluable contributions of those who have come to the U.S. from other nations legally.

But, at the same time, most Americans favor border enforcement. Hillary Clinton found that out the hard way, when WikiLeaks exposed her making this comment in 2013: "My dream is a hemispheric common market, with open trade and open borders, sometime in the future.…”

Those remarks gave candidate Trump the ammunition he needed to paint his opponent as weak on protecting our borders; it didn’t help that the lines came from a paid speech Clinton made to a Brazilian bank.

Polling has shown that 65 percent of Americans favor coupling legal status for the Dreamers with tougher immigration enforcement. Some 79 percent of those surveyed think employers should have to verify the legal status of their workers, for instance. Democrats balking at such a compromise are on the wrong side of this issue.

Many in the liberal media argue that the GOP will be blamed for any spending impasse that forces a government shutdown, since Republicans have a majority in both houses of Congress and occupy the White House. But Americans understand that passing a budget requires 60 votes in the Senate, which Republicans do not have. Republicans will need at least 10 Democratic votes.

Democrats are in a pickle. They can anger the nation by blocking a proposed spending resolution that lacks a DACA fix but that would fund our military and provide a six-year extension of the popular Children’s Health Insurance Program. Or they can infuriate Hispanics by keeping the federal lights on and working to resolve the Dreamer problem as part of a broader immigration package.

Latinos do not look to Republicans to fix this problem; they expect Democrats to do so. It isn’t the office of Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., that has attracted a protest demonstration by immigration activists – it is Chuck Schumer’s.

Everyone wants changes to our immigration system, including the White House. And nearly everyone wants to protect the Dreamers. There’s lots of room to negotiate, and President Trump has signaled support for a compromise.

But a compromise – a win – on immigration would be another nightmare for Democrats. The optics of President Trump hosting a signing ceremony in the White House to celebrate passage of an immigration bill, which has eluded the past several presidents, would be unimaginably valuable for Republicans as we approach the November elections.

A new immigration law would be almost as valuable for Republicans as the millions of workers getting bonuses and wage hikes because of the GOP tax bill that President Trump signed into law.

A few more wins and Democrats are going to have a hard time persuading voters that President Trump and a Republican Congress aren’t indeed Making America Great Again.

Hannity Battles Ramos on Immigration: 'Are You Literally Saying They're Lying?'

Acting ICE Director Tom Homan responded Thursday to a flurry of criticism from California Democrats over the Trump administration's lawsuit that seeks to block the state's sanctuary policies.

California Gov. Jerry Brown blasted Attorney General Jeff Sessions on Wednesday, accusing the administration of trying to "polarize America."

"At a time of unprecedented political turmoil, Jeff Sessions has come to California to further divide and polarize America. Jeff, these political stunts may be the norm in Washington, but they don’t work here. SAD!!!” said Brown.

Sen. Kamala Harris (D-Calif.) accused ICE of potentially abusing its power by going after illegal immigrants who do not pose a public safety threat to the community.

Homan said Harris' arguments are factually inaccurate. He said he has invited Harris and Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D-Calif.) to several meetings in recent months to explain the enforcement operations and each time the senators have cancelled.

"Nine out of every 10 aliens we arrested [in the last fiscal year] did have a criminal history. ... They don't want to know the facts. They want to keep playing this political game and put smoke and mirrors up about what ICE is actually doing," he said on "Fox & Friends."

California Senator @KamalaHarris says the Trump administration is giving #ICE too much power. Acting ICE Director Thomas Homan responds on @foxandfriends: "We're not abusing our authority, we are enforcing the law." pic.twitter.com/I8hS4rAlwr — Brian Kilmeade (@kilmeade) March 8, 2018

The Justice Department filed a lawsuit this week to block three recently-passed California state laws that interfere with federal immigration policies.

One of the laws limits state and local cooperation with Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE), while another prevents private companies from voluntarily cooperating with federal immigration enforcement officials.

Federal officials have accused California of standing in the way of its plan to step up enforcement of federal immigration laws.

The Justice Department is also reviewing Oakland Mayor Libby Schaaf's decision to warn of an immigration sweep in advance, which ICE said allowed hundreds of immigrants to escape detention.

Homan said ICE is not "going to war" against California, explaining that he is getting "numerous" emails from citizens who support the enhanced enforcement of immigration laws.

"Let's make something clear: there's no prerequisite that an alien has to commit yet another crime when they get to the United States to have the law enforced upon them," he said.

Homan said "more people will die" trying to come to the United States over the Mexican border if they believe they can reach a state where they will be shielded from deportation.

Watch the interview above.

Slain Border Patrol Agent's Brother Pleads for Trump, Sessions to Reopen 'Fast and Furious' Case

Sessions: California Is Blocking Federal Immigration Enforcement With 'Radical' Policies

Judge Nap: Mueller's Probe Is 'Gearing Up and the President Remains in His Crosshairs'

US pilot Amelia Earhart was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic in 1932, and set a number of other aviation records.

She disappeared with her navigator, Captain Fred Noonan, in 1937 over the Pacific Ocean during an attempt to fly around the globe.

Earhart was born in Kansas in 1897. She started learning to fly some 24 years later.

A crowd cheered as she boarded her single-engine Lockheed Vega airplane in Londonderry, Northern Ireland, for a trip to London on 22 May 1932.

Earhart and Noonan first tried to fly around the would in 1924 - their plane is seen here over the Golden Gate Bridge near San Francisco. The trip had to be abandoned after the plane crashed on take-off in Hawaii.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Researchers used photographs and clothing to determine that the bones match

Bones discovered on a Pacific island in 1940 are "likely" to be those of famed pilot Amelia Earhart, according to a US peer reviewed science journal.

Earhart, her plane, and her navigator vanished without a trace in 1937 over the Pacific Ocean. Many theories have sought to explain her disappearance.

But a new study published in Forensic Anthropology claims these bones prove she died as an island castaway.

The report claims they are a 99% match, despite an earlier conclusion.

The study, titled Amelia Earhart and the Nikumaroro Bones, was first published by the University of Florida and conducted by Professor Richard Jantz from the University of Tennessee.

It disputes that the remains found on the eastern Pacific island of Nikumaroro - about 1,800 miles (2,900km) southwest of Hawaii - belonged to a man, as a researcher had determined in 1941.

Earhart was known to have been near the island when she vanished during her doomed attempt to fly across the globe.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Earhart was perhaps the most famous woman in the world when she vanished

A British party exploring the island for habitation in 1940 found a human skull, a woman's shoe, a Navy tool used by her navigator Fred Noonan (who also vanished), and a bottle of the herbal liqueur Benedictine - "something Earhart was known to carry".

"There was suspicion at the time that the bones could be the remains of Amelia Earhart," Dr Jantz wrote in the study.

The party found a total of 13 bones, which were then sent to Fiji to be analysed by Dr D W Hoodless, who concluded that they had belonged to a male.

But Dr Jantz argues that because forensic osteology - the study of bones - was still in its early stages, Dr Hoodless probably reached a wrong conclusion.

"Forensic anthropology was not well developed in the early 20th century," the paper states.

Consulting Dr Hoodless' measurements of the bones, Dr Jantz used Fordisc, a modern computer programme now widely used by forensic anthropologists, to compare them to Earhart's height and body stature.

The bones have unfortunately since been lost, and so cannot be analysed.

But the research team used historical photographs, as well as her pilot's and driver's licences, to determine that her body proportions matched the skeletal remains.

A "historical seamstress" was also consulted to analyse her clothing, including "the inseam length and waist circumference of Earhart's trousers".

"This analysis reveals that Earhart is more similar to the Nikumaroro bones than 99% of individuals in a large reference sample," the report states.

The research found the remains belonged to a taller-than-average woman of European descent, as Earhart was.

"This strongly supports the conclusion that the Nikumaroro bones belonged to Amelia Earhart."

"Until definitive evidence is presented that the remains are not those of Amelia Earhart," Dr Jantz writes in the paper, "the most convincing argument is that they are hers."

Earhart was the first woman to fly across the Atlantic Ocean, and was considered one of the most famous women in the world when the mystery of her disappearance began.

She is still frequently honoured as a pioneer of women's empowerment, and was recently chosen by Mattel to be depicted as a Barbie doll.

Image copyright Getty Images

A newly-discovered photo suggests legendary US pilot Amelia Earhart might have died in Japanese custody - and not in a plane crash in the Pacific.

If true, it would solve one of aviation history's biggest mysteries.

Earhart vanished during a 1937 flight over the Pacific - and her disappearance has been a breeding ground for speculation ever since.

A photograph from the 1930s shows a figure that could be her, taken on the then-Japanese Marshall Islands.

However, at least one prominent expert has poured cold water on the claim, saying he was "astounded" it had taken off.

The new material - presented as evidence for an old theory - is a black-and-white photograph found in the vaults of the US National Archives.

Image copyright Courtesy of Les Kinney/US National Archives Image caption Earhart, or not? The 1930s picture shows a group of people on the wharf at Jaluit Atoll

It shows a group of people standing on a dock. The label on the photograph says it was taken on Jaluit Atoll in the Marshall Islands, presumably by a US spy.

The link might seem thin, though, to the legendary pilot who five years before her disappearance had risen to fame as the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic.

The claim is that one seated person with her back to the camera could be Earhart, while another figure on the far left in the photo is said to be Fred Noonan, her navigator on that last flight.

On the very right of the picture is a blurry section which, it is claimed, shows Earhart's plane.

Image copyright Courtesy of Les Kinney/US National Archives Image caption These magnified details of the new picture are alleged to show (from left), navigator Fred Noonan, Earhart herself, and their plane

Ric Gillespie, author of Finding Amelia and executive director of The International Group for Historic Aircraft Recovery (TIGHAR), is certainly unconvinced.

He told the BBC: "This photograph has people convinced. I'm astounded by this. I mean, my God! Look at this photograph... Let's use our heads for a moment. It's undated. They think it's from 1937. Okay. If it's from July 1, 1937 then it can't be Amelia, because she hadn't taken off yet.

"If it's from 1935 or 1938 it can't be her.... This photograph has to have been taken within a very narrow window - within a couple of days of when she disappeared."

He notes that the photograph came from an Office of Naval Intelligence file, saying it was "very natural" the US would want a picture of this Japanese naval asset.

"And what does the photo say that it shows? ... Jaluit Atoll - Jaluit Island. It doesn't say 'Amelia Earhart in Japanese custody'!

"If this is a picture of Amelia Earhart in Japanese custody, where are the Japanese? There are no soldiers in this picture. Nobody in uniform," he observes.

Image copyright Laurie Rubin Image caption Ric Gillespie, author of Finding Amelia, does not believe the picture shows Earhart and her navigator

The photograph was released by the US-based History channel ahead of a documentary to run this weekend. If the goal was to drum up attention - and hence audience numbers - it appears to have paid off.

A preview of the programme has two experts backing up the claim by looking at the torso measurements of the woman alleged to be Amelia Earhart in the photo, and teeth and hairline of the figure claimed to be Fred Noonan.

Mystery hunters and stories

A far stretch? After all, the heroine has her back to the camera and it's debatable how much of a hairline let alone teeth can really be made out reliably on a faded photograph from the 1930s.

Mr Gillespie says it doesn't match other known pictures of the famous aviator.

"The person who they say is Amelia Earhart might be a white woman. But her hair is way too long to be Amelia's. We have many pictures of Earhart taken the day before she took off, and her hair's a lot shorter than that."

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption The fate of Amelia Earhart and Fred Noonan has long fascinated historians

He adds that the man identified as Fred Noonan does not, in his view, resemble the navigator. Further, his shirt is the wrong colour.

"The man is dressed in white. Noonan always wore dark shirts and dark slacks. Amelia didn't have a shirt like that with her on the trip either. So the Japanese have apparently given them new clothes.

"Everything about this is wrong," he concludes. "I'm astounded."

Did she crash on land?

Scepticism aside, the alleged scoop feeds into one of the existing theories about what happened to Earhart and her navigator.

She disappeared during her attempt to fly around the globe, trying to reach Howland Island in the Pacific for refuelling.

The official explanation is that she didn't find the island, lost communication and ran out of fuel, only to crash into the ocean.

While that's a largely accepted version of events, there is no evidence - as in debris - to back it up.

The two other prominent theories are that Earhart crash-landed on or near the then-Japanese Marshall Islands, or that she made it to Nikumaroro island near Kiribati and died a castaway there.

There is no conclusive evidence for either of these theories - but that hasn't stopped amateur and professional historians from digging into them.

Image copyright TIGHAR Image caption Nikumaroro island was uninhabited at the time Earhart would have landed there

Parts of a skeleton found on Nikumaroro in 1940 were initially thought to have been hers, but doctors at the time decided they belonged to a male body.

Mr Gillespie, who backs the Nikumaroro theory, has led 11 expeditions in the South Pacific to research Earhart's fate. He points out that the island was uninhabited at the time when Earhart would have landed there.

He and his team have recovered artefacts which they say strongly suggest the presence of an American woman from the right era - including a makeup box from the 1930s, a popular US women's moisturiser, and a jacket zipper.

Image copyright TIGHAR Image caption Ric Gillespie and his team excavating on Nikumaroro, where they believe Earhart's plane came down

Image copyright TIGHAR Image caption The team found a bone-handled jack knife that matches one mentioned in Earhart's inventory

Mr Gillespie also cites the timing and location of radio distress calls sent by Earhart after her plane came down. He says the calls were sent "night after night" - which would suggest the plane was on land, not in the water - because if the radios got wet, they wouldn't work.

"After six nights the radio signals stopped," he told the BBC. "We now think that's because the airplane was landed on the reef round the island, which is flat, smooth - dries at low tide... But the tide does come in and go out, and ... by the sixth night [he believes] the aeroplane was washed into the ocean by the tides.

"So when the planes from the battleship flew over the island a week later, no plane was visible."

The rest of the search took place in open ocean, and found nothing. The would-be rescuers concluded that Earhart and Noonan had sunk without a trace.

A mystery still unsolved

The conclusion drawn by the History documentary, based on the new Marshall Islands picture, is that Earhart was taken by the Japanese, later interned and eventually died a prisoner of war.

The Marshall Islands went from German to Japanese hands during World War One, and ahead of the 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor became an important military post for Tokyo.

The Japanese archives have no records of Earhart as a prisoner - but with many documents from these archives known to have been lost, this does not necessarily prove the story wrong.

At the same time, the discovery of a single photograph that may or may not show the two lost pilots is likely to add to the mystery rather than solve it.

PA Radio Host: Trump Steel Tariffs Could 'Mean a Lot' After Decades of 'Jobs Disappearing'

'How Much Are You Worth, Nancy?': Pelosi Heckled at Town Hall While Slamming Trump Tax Law

An Ohio forklift driver who switched parties in 2016 to support President Trump applauded the plan to impose new tariffs on steel and aluminum imports.

Geno DiFabio, who appeared alongside Trump at a rally in Youngstown over the summer, was a lifelong Democrat who embraced Trump's promise to end harmful trade deals.

Trump's tariff plan generated a huge backlash last week from his fellow Republicans, but was praised by an Ohio Democratic lawmaker. Trump has refused to back down, however, downplaying the fears of a trade war which have driven the stock market lower.

To protect our Country we must protect American Steel! #AMERICA FIRST — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 5, 2018

We are on the losing side of almost all trade deals. Our friends and enemies have taken advantage of the U.S. for many years. Our Steel and Aluminum industries are dead. Sorry, it’s time for a change! MAKE AMERICA GREAT AGAIN! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 5, 2018

DiFabio said that the workers he has spoken to in recent days are happy about Trump's announcement.

"Let's make it fair and we'll beat 'em. Those jobs will come back, the jobs are already coming back," he told Griff Jenkins Sunday, adding Trump is following through on "exactly what he said he was gonna do."

DiFabio said for decades, he and other workers watched as U.S. steel plants closed and they wondered why the U.S. manpower and technology was not being used.

"We invented the technology to make this stuff and they're taking it all off of us," he recalled.

He said President Trump is acting like a referee to level the playing field, whereas previous administrations declined to act on behalf of the American worker.

"The guy knows what he's doing."

Watch the interview above.

Top Dems Split from Pelosi on Tax Cut Criticisms, 'Crumbs' Statement

Trish Regan Calls Out Pelosi for 'Crumbs' Remark: 'What World Do You Live On?'

Rep. Gaetz to Jeff Sessions: Appoint a Second Special Counsel or 'Step Aside'

ABC News’ “The View” star Joy Behar has reportedly apologized for recent comments that mocked Vice President Pence’s Christian faith.

Disney CEO Bob Iger said during the Q&A portion of a shareholder meeting on Thursday that Behar apologized directly to Pence on the phone.

The shareholder who asked the question was Justin Danhof, who is the general counsel for the National Center for Public Policy Research. Danhof told Iger that some of Disney’s recent decisions are “strange when trust in media is at an all-time low” and referred to Disney’s ESPN as a “24/7 anti-Trump tirade channel” before bringing up the Behar controversy.

“What do you say to the tens of millions of Christians, and President Trump supporters, that your networks have so blatantly offended and ascribed hateful labels?” Danhof asked. “Specifically, do you think, like Mrs. Hostin and Mrs. Behar, that the Christian faith is akin to a dangerous mental illness?”

Iger responded by saying, “I don’t know where I start. First of all, Joy Behar apologized to Vice President Pence directly. She made a call to him and apologized, which I thought was absolutely appropriate.”

Iger told the crowd he was “glad to hear” Behar apologized because he “takes exception” to what she said.

“I don’t think it was right,” Iger said.

A spokesperson for Pence did not immediately respond when asked for confirmation.

“Not the most powerful man in Hollywood, today he was the most tepid man in Hollywood,” Danhof told Fox News, referring to Iger. “He took one real question after about a dozen soliloquies of praise for how great and wonderful he is.”

Back on Feb. 13, “The View” panel criticized Pence's faith when co-host Sunny Hostin said, “I don’t know that I want my vice president, um — speaking in tongues and having Jesus speak to him.”

Behar chimed in, adding that hearing from Jesus is actually called “mental illness.” Pence himself didn’t appreciate the comments and slammed ABC News.

“To have ABC maintain a broadcast forum that compared Christianity to mental illness is just wrong,” Pence said during an appearance on C-SPAN following the controversial remarks. “It is simply wrong for ABC to have a television program that expresses that kind of religious intolerance.”

The Media Research Center launched a campaign to hold “View” co-hosts accountable for spewing “anti-Christian bigotry,” and ABC received over 30,000 phone calls from angry viewers.

The MRC, which says it's “America’s leading media watchdog in documenting, exposing and neutralizing liberal media bias,” posted contact information for 14 of the ABC News program’s advertisers as well as the president of ABC.

The controversy resulted in a variety of industry watchdogs suggesting it would be wise for ABC News to divorce itself from the show, which in a typical broadcast features four outspoken liberals and a single conservative.

“It's a pure opinion and infotainment program and therefore should be under its entertainment division,” The Hill media columnist Joe Concha told Fox News after Behar’s comments about Pence.

Meanwhile, liberal hero Oprah Winfrey recently told CBS’ “60 Minutes Overtime” that God has not told her to run for president despite widespread speculation that her infamous Golden Globes speech was a preview of a potential 2020 matchup with President Trump.

Behar, an outspoken liberal, did not accuse Winfrey of having mental illness.

Image copyright Getty Images

A couple's rights were violated when their foster children were removed for refusing to say the Easter Bunny was real, a Canadian court has ruled.

Frances and Derek Baars, who describe themselves as a Christian couple, said they would host an Easter egg hunt, but did not plan to address the bunny.

The agency then removed the children, aged three and five, and closed the couple's foster home.

The couple sued the Children's Aid Society (CAS) as a result.

"There is ample evidence to support the fact that the children were removed because the Baars refused to either tell or imply that the Easter Bunny was delivering chocolate to the Baars' home." Justice Andrew Goodman wrote in a decision released on Tuesday.

"I am more than satisfied that the society actions interfered substantially with the Baars' religious beliefs."

As devout Reformed Presbyterians, Derek and Frances Baars said they did not believe in celebrating Halloween or lying about Santa Claus or the Easter Bunny.

CAS support worker Tracey Lindsay acknowledged that the girls were well cared for, CTV News reported.

The CAS contended Ms Lindsay "never asked (the Baars) to lie or betray their faith".

But the Baars argue she told them it was their duty as foster parents to teach the children about the Easter Bunny, according to court documents.

More like this:

For Easter, the couple told their case worker that they would buy the girls Easter dresses and hide chocolate eggs around the house. Their one sticking point was that they would not say the Easter Bunny was real.

In late February 2016, the couple said their case worker told them that the girls would be taken away and their foster home permanently closed if the Baars refused to proactively confirm that the Easter Bunny existed.

As a compromise, the couple said the girls could celebrate Easter with another foster family. But the girls were instead taken away and the couple were barred from becoming foster parents in the future.

Justice Goodman found the couple celebrated Christmas with the girls, bought them presents and and shared photos of the holiday with their mum.

The couple's record has now been cleared and they are allowed to become foster parents or adopt in the future.

"We are very thankful for it, that we've been vindicated. Our names have been cleared and we don't have that hanging over us anymore," Mrs Baars told the National Post.

Dominic Verticchio, executive director of the Hamilton CAS, apologised to the couple through the newspaper.

"We recognise what our mistakes were," he said. "We respect the decision of the court… and we have to ensure it doesn't happen again."

President Trump is right to call for tariffs on steel and aluminum imports. Tariffs are often used as a last resort, but the domestic steel industry has reached that point. Rather than attacking the president for his proposal, all Americans should applaud him for beginning to end our nation’s wholesale surrender on trade.

The president’s action is already producing results, as U.S. Steel announced Wednesday that it will restart one of its idled blast furnaces in Granite City, Illinois and create approximately 500 jobs.

I have visited communities deeply affected by steel imports.

Coatesville, Pennsylvania is home to the oldest continuously operating steel mill in the country, and is among the last places in America capable of supplying the military with steel armor plate that meets exacting defense specifications.

In 2007, when the Pentagon escalated the war effort in Iraq, Coatesville’s sister mill in nearby Conshohocken turned its production on a dime to fulfill military orders for the steel needed in mine-resistant, ambush-protected vehicles.

Today, both mills teeter on the brink of collapse. So workers there listened intently when candidate Trump promised to rearrange trade agreements and bring factory jobs back to this country.

The president’s announcement last week of a 25 percent tariff on imported steel and a 10 percent tariff on imported aluminum is precisely what he promised. Enacting these tariffs will restore some needed sanity to the global trade in the metals markets, which is in imbalance because of the actions of China’s government.

Beijing has followed a state-led policy with a goal of dominating the global steel industry. This has been so successful that China now makes half the world’s steel. Big government subsidies enable Chinese steel mills to dump steel on world markets at prices below the cost of production, creating unfair competition for steel mills in the U.S. and other nations. There is no end in sight to the overcapacity China has created.

Chinese steel has consequentially flooded outside of its borders and roiled the global market, affecting mills and workers everywhere.

In the United States – the most open steel market in the world – 10 blast furnaces have closed since 2000, and our remaining mills only operate at roughly 75 percent of their capacity.

More than a quarter of our market is serviced by imports. During a decade of slow but steady economic expansion, the American steel industry has instead remained in a malaise, its workers plagued by the threat of layoffs.

This is the reality in steelmaking communities like Lorain, Ohio, or along the lakeshore in Northwest Indiana. Yet in the face of these facts, many of the president’s fellow Republicans are lashing out at his attempt to address these problems.

Despite that, President Trump beat an almost entirely free-trading field in the 2016 GOP primaries. Though he continues to enjoy support of the conservative base, some Republicans will apparently not stomach even this slightest break from trade policy dogma.

House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., and many House Republicans are seeking to block or water down President Trump’s plans, though last year Ryan himself proposed a 20 percent border adjustment tax on all imports.

National Economic Council Director Gary Cohn (before his resignation in protest Tuesday) was marshalling Wall Street collaborators and global companies to attack the tariffs proposal, even though taken to their maximum extent the tariffs would mean a $9 billion cost spread through a $20 trillion economy.

That same crowd completely misjudged America’s years-long economic embrace of the Chinese government, which is currently using this influx of wealth to fortify an enormous mercantilist police state.

These same critics argue tariffs will raise consumer costs and hurt steel communities far more than they help. But the only credible review of former President George W. Bush’s comparable tariffs in 2002 showed most steel consumers didn’t see a significant price hike, and that American steel prices rose even more slowly than global prices did.

Those tariffs allowed a domestic industry staggered by more than 30 bankruptcies time to recover – and even recapture market share before China’s steel juggernaut emerged.

The critics also claim there is no national security basis for protecting American steel. But they conveniently ignore the fact that you can’t build a steel mill quickly in an emergency, and that our steelmaking redundancies are already becoming thin.

The Navy’s Virginia-class submarines rely on specialty armor plate forged in places like Coatesville. There is only domestic producer of electrical steel necessary to build power transformers – the kind of infrastructure needed after a natural disaster in Texas or Puerto Rico.

An economics textbook wouldn’t see anything wrong with America offshoring its entire steel industry, but most Americans would be unnerved to be defended by tanks made with Chinese steel, nor would they support them rolling down Pennsylvania Avenue in Washington in a military parade.

Instead of attacking the president, the critics should instead show us their own plans to stop the economic bleeding in America’s industrial belt.

Because too often, it’s all about President Trump. He’s regularly accused of looking to the past when he speaks of industry, and specifically of steel.

But the people in our steel mill towns know their communities won’t ever again look like they did in the 1950s. That’s not what they’re asking for; they’re simply asking to be included in America’s future.

This tariff will give them a chance at that – and set the tone for how we should now approach China and its state-led capitalism.

Already, China is well on its way toward dominating the markets for future-oriented technologies like semiconductors and artificial intelligence, and it has used trade as a tool to achieve that objective. China forces technology transfers upon foreign firms operating in its borders. It rampantly abuses intellectual property protections.

And it’s even unsurprising then that the only time Chinese military officers have been indicted in the United States for cyber espionage was for spying on private businesses. What kind? American steel and aluminum industries, among other heavy manufacturing targets.

Those military officers will likely never face trial, but we have a chance now to defend America’s economic interests. Tariffs are a dirty word inside the Beltway. But I suspect that people who live elsewhere, in places like Coatesville, want to defend American jobs.

'Markets Do Not Like This': Sandra Smith Grills WH Trade Official on Steel Tariffs

President Trump's surprise plan to impose tariffs on aluminum and steel imports was met with widespread derision from his own party, including from Sen. Ben Sasse (R-Neb.), who called the idea potentially disastrous for American consumers.

Despite a significant drop in the stock markets Thursday and Friday, Trump gave no indication that he would back off the plan for a 25 percent tariff for steel imports and 10 percent tariff for aluminum imports.

We must protect our country and our workers. Our steel industry is in bad shape. IF YOU DON’T HAVE STEEL, YOU DON’T HAVE A COUNTRY! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 2, 2018

When a country Taxes our products coming in at, say, 50%, and we Tax the same product coming into our country at ZERO, not fair or smart. We will soon be starting RECIPROCAL TAXES so that we will charge the same thing as they charge us. $800 Billion Trade Deficit-have no choice! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 2, 2018

Sasse said what Trump proposed amounts to "leftist economic policy," arguing trade wars have never worked.

"If you own a steel mill, today was great for you. If you consume steel - and every American family bought something at the store tonight with metals in it - today's a bad day for you," he said, warning of future "retaliatory" measures against farmers, ranchers and consumers in the United States as the trade war worsens.

Trade is great for America. It's great for American families. Trade creates jobs & lowers prices for American families. Trade wars do the opposite. No trade war has ever worked. We don't want to make America 1930 again. pic.twitter.com/fK7oy7GcVz — Senator Ben Sasse (@SenSasse) March 2, 2018

Bret Baier asked Sasse about states, won by Trump in 2016, that have seen job losses due to China's trade practices and about the voters who supported Trump's position on trade.

"This is leftist economic policy and we've tried it a whole bunch of times over the last two centuries and every time, American families have suffered," he responded.

Sasse said Trump made a lot of promises on the campaign trail, but once he got into the White House he was advised toward positions that are better for the country long-term.

Sen. Orrin Hatch (R-Utah) echoed Sasse's sentiments, saying "whoever advised him on this ought to be reprimanded."

The new tariff plan, however, earned praise from some Democrats, including Rep. Marcy Kaptur of Ohio.

"I've served in Congress for over three decades. We've been waiting for this. We don't want to wait for the steel industry collapse. We can't afford to have the aluminum industry collapse in this country," said Kaptur.

Watch the interview above.

Columnist: I Bought My First Gun Because of the CNN Town Hall

'Imagine If Obama Said That': Tucker Calls Out Trump on 'Take Guns First' Comments

'Something Smells Like a Rat': Mark Levin Calls for 'Abolishing' the FISA Court

A great wailing and gnashing of teeth arose across the land last week after the Trump administration announced its plan to place tariffs on imported steel and aluminum. Some conservatives cried that the tariffs – 25 percent on steel and 10 percent on aluminum – would incite an international trade war.

House Speaker Paul Ryan, R-Wis., claimed the moderately sized tariffs on two metals would reverse the economic boon that he believes the tax breaks his party gave to corporations and the rich are sure to create. The good times would be over. Kaput!

This drama comes from a politician who proposed a border adjustment tax on all imports, not just two metals. That tax that would have cost American consumers $1 trillion.

This hyperbole comes from conservatives who deliberately blind themselves to the devastation Chinese trade cheating has caused the American steel and aluminum industries.

This hysteria comes from corporations that use steel and aluminum and are apparently just fine with Chinese trade violations completely killing off American producers, leaving our country without domestic suppliers of metals essential for national defense.

The tariff proposal wasn’t sudden or out of the blue. It came after President Trump announced last April that the U.S. Department of Commerce would evaluate whether the damage done to the American steel and aluminum industries by bad trade endangered national security. The Commerce Department told President Trump in December that it did.

The Commerce Department recommended remediation through tariffs, import limits or both. The department estimates the cost of the tariffs to the U.S. economy at $9 billion, or a fraction of 1 percent of the nation’s total gross domestic product – and a fraction of the cost of Speaker Ryan’s border adjustment tax.

The beverage industry went crazy anyway. Coors, for example, claimed the tariffs would cost jobs across the beer industry and “American consumers will suffer.”

Here’s what Coors calls suffering: a penny price hike. There is about three cents worth of aluminum in a beer can. A 10 percent tariff on aluminum could increase the price of an entire six-pack of Coors by not quite two cents. Little more than a penny.

Frankly, an extra penny or two doesn’t sound like real suffering. It’s not clear just how many football fans would forego the six-pack for Sunday’s game because of that extra penny. It’s not clear just how many beer industry jobs will really be lost because of one extra cent per six-pack.

The additional cost to a new car, which contains much more steel and aluminum, would be more significant. A senior economist at Cox Automotive estimated it at $200.

But that’s only if American aluminum and steel companies raise their prices by 10 and 25 percent.

American steel and aluminum manufacturers are not subject to the tariffs, so they don’t have to raise their prices. But they may need to increase their prices because excessive production of aluminum and steel in China has severely depressed prices worldwide.

China is massively overproducing the metals at massively subsidized mills. The Chinese government owns some mills and provides supports for the industries in the form of loans that don’t have to be repaid, low-cost or free raw materials and underpriced utilities. It then dumps its excess aluminum and steel on the world market at prices below production costs.

The Chinese action forces down the price of the metals to the point where mills in free market nations like the United States go bankrupt. It is a trade war perpetrated by China on the rest of the world.

China’s practices violate international trade rules. The United States, in conjunction with European allies and others, has repeatedly over the past decade negotiated with China to stop defying the rules it agreed to abide by when it gained entrance to the World Trade Organization. China repeatedly has said it would follow the rules. And then it doesn’t.

China’s actions have has killed American mills, thrown tens of thousands out of work and devastated mill towns. Steel employment in the United States has declined 35 percent since 2000, with 14,500 workers losing their jobs just between January of 2015 and June of 2016. The plummet in aluminum employment was even steeper, with 58 percent of jobs lost in just the three years between 2013 and 2016.

In 2000, 105 companies produced raw steel at 144 U.S. locations. Now 38 companies forge at 93 locations. There’s only one company left in the United States that produces the Navy armor plate used to build the Virginia Class submarines.

Over the past six years, six aluminum smelters closed permanently. Just five remain, with only two operating at full capacity. And only one of those produces the high-purity aluminum required for defense aerospace needs.

To see real suffering, Coors might take a look at unemployed aluminum and steel workers and their crumbling communities. Coors should note that both U.S. Steel and Century Aluminum have said the tariffs will enable them to reopen closed mills and rehire a total of 700 workers.

Unlike Coors, conservative TV commentators and Speaker Ryan, most Americans are willing to pay the extra penny per six-pack to ensure their country has the domestic aluminum smelting and steel forging ability that is crucial to our national security.

President Trump is signing an order Thursday that imposes tariffs on steel and aluminum imports from all foreign countries, while carving out an exception for Canada and Mexico for now while North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) negotiations are under way, White House officials told Fox News.

The president, joined by steel and aluminum workers, will sign a companion proclamation — one on steel and one on aluminum – that will institute a tariff of 25 percent on steel and 10 percent on aluminum imports. The tariffs will become effective in 15 days, with exclusions for Mexico and Canada taking effect “immediately,” officials said.

“A nation that does not protect prosperity at home cannot protect its interests abroad,” the president said. “When it comes time where our country can’t make aluminum and steel, you almost don’t have much of a country.”

A senior White House official said Thursday that the move to impose tariffs would protect “national security” from the effects of “unfair trade practices.”

The U.S. is the world’s largest importer of steel, importing nearly four times as much as it exports, according to the White House. The U.S. imported five times as much primary aluminum as it produced in 2016.

The senior official told reporters Thursday that the move came after an investigation, led by Commerce Secretary Wilbur Ross, and interagency meetings from April 2017 through January 2018, which found that the current level of aluminum and steel imports to the U.S. had the “potential to threaten our national security.”

“The investigation provided the president with the powers to take actions, should the department find that imports of commodities like aluminum and steel provide a significant threat to our national security and economic security,” the official said, noting that national security was “broadly defined,” and not limited to national defense.

Ross recommended a 24 percent tariff on steel, but the administration official said that the official 25 percent tariff was based on additional data and support.

Aluminum is used in a range of ground weapons and aircraft, and steel is required for aircraft carriers, amphibious force ships, submarines, tanks and light armored vehicles. The White House said the investigation rendered the U.S. “unable” to produce enough steel and aluminum to meet national defense and critical industry needs in the event of a national emergency.

The move though, should not be a “surprise,” according to the official, who called it another “promise made” and “promise kept” by Trump.

“No one should be surprised with any kind of action we’re taking,” the official said. “This is one of the most well-discussed, well-signaled actions in the history of trade actions.”

The Trump administration, in January, approved safeguard tariffs on imported large residential washing machines and solar cells.

The official said Thursday that there is language in the proclamation outlining “security relationships” with countries around the globe, and noted that “they will be welcome to discuss” with the U.S. “alternate ways” to tariff the imports.

Officials said that Mexico and Canada would be exempt from the tariffs during NAFTA negotiations. The president, himself, has hinted at other exemptions.

“If that [NAFTA] negotiation is unsuccessful then tariffs will be applied across the board,” Peter Navarro, the director of the White House National Trade Council, told Fox News. “Now, importantly, in addition to that, there is language that will allow other countries to effectively propose ways that they could get a similar dispensation in exchange for more fair and reciprocal trade with the United States.”

But the 25 percent and 10 percent levels should not be seen as firm, officials said. Navarro added that if Canada, Mexico, or any other country is eventually granted an exemption, then tariffs would be raised for all other countries affected.

The president, himself, has said the U.S. would be “very fair.”

“[We’re] sticking with 10 and 25 percent initially,” Trump said during a Cabinet meeting on Thursday. “I’ll have a right to go up or down, depending on the country.”

Trump added, though, “We’re going to be very flexible.”

Navarro told Fox News that the president was not using the tariffs as a “bargaining chip,” but noted that “any country that is allowed to be removed from the tariffs would result in higher tariffs for everybody else.”

“So we still maintain a level of protection in defense of the aluminum and steel industries,” Navarro said.

The White House said that “key sectors” of steel and aluminum industries have faced “long-term downward trends in employment.” The White House said employment in iron and steel mills has dropped by more than 54,000 since 2000. The aluminum industry has cut more than 40,000 jobs in the same time period.

“The decline of American steel and aluminum production has resulted in extensive job losses for hardworking Americans in industries critical to our national security and economic well-being,” the White House said Thursday, noting that despite “considerable growth in demand,” six primary aluminum smelters have permanently shut down since 2012.

Fox News' Adam Shaw, John Roberts, Kristin Brown and Serafin Gomez contributed to this report.

Campaigning for midterm elections has begun in the US, including in Texas, where voters choose between Beto O’Rourke, a Democrat, and the incumbent senator, Ted Cruz, a Republican and former presidential candidate.

The contest between the two men, which was finalised on Tuesday night, has been used to demonstrate that Texas, a conservative state that has not elected a Democrat in a statewide position since 1994, might be in play for the liberal Democratic Party.

Midterm elections to decide the make-up of the country's legislature will be held in November this year. A total of 469 seats will be up for grabs in both the Senate and House of Representatives.

Controversy has arisen around the names of the candidates as Cruz, a staunch conservative and Catholic, unveiled a political advertisement featuring a song accusing O'Rourke - who uses a common Latino first name, although he is not of Latino descent - of changing his name to win voters.

"Little Robert wanted to fit in, so he changed his name to 'Beto', and hid it with a grin," the song claimed.

O’Rourke has said that the name "Beto" is a common nickname for those named Robert in his hometown of El Paso, Texas.

The Democratic candidate posted a photograph of himself as a baby wearing a sweater with "Beto" stitched on the chest.

But O'Rourke is not the only name-changing candidate in the contest.

Cruz's given name is Rafael Edward Cruz, although he goes by "Ted", a name commonly used by white Americans.

O'Rourke has not commented on Cruz's choice of name.

Favourability ratings

Though most polls and political analysts believe Cruz still has the edge over O’Rouke, there are signs that he could lose.

Democrats feel more confident this election season due to the continued unpopularity of President Donald Trump.

Favourability ratings for Trump, a Republican, hover near 40 percent, nationally.

The president is equally unpopular in Texas.

{articleGUID}

Republicans have lost elections in other conservative states where Trump is unpopular.

Cruz is also unpopular among voters, according to the Texas Politics Project (TPP), a part of the University of Texas that conducts public opinion polling.

As of February, about 42 percent of Texans viewed him as favourable while 31 percent of respondents considered Cruz "very unfavourable".

Another 12 percent said they did not view him favourably or unfavourably.

Cruz's favourability rating was placed at 40 percent by TPP.

Nationally, Cruz's approval ratings are in the single digits.

Most Texans do not have as firm an opinion about O’Rourke as they do Cruz, who has served as a senator for the past six years, TPP polling shows.

Still, O'Rourke is gaining steam on Cruz in terms of fundraising.

In the last three months of 2017, the O'Rourke campaign raised $2.4m while Cruz raised $1.9m. It was the second time O’Rourke outraised Cruz.

While O'Rourke has won in recent fundraising quarters, Cruz still has the overall advantage.

The incumbent raised $7.1m in 2017 to O’Rourke's $4.6m.

President Donald Trump's top economic adviser has resigned after clashing with the president over planned tariffs on steel and aluminium.

Gary Cohn's departure is the latest in a long string of departures. Cohn is expected to leave in a matter of weeks, the White House has confirmed on Tuesday.

Cohn, a free trade proponent and Goldman Sachs veteran, had been counselling the president against his proposal to impose a 25 percent tariff on steel and 10 percent tariff on aluminium imports.

Cohn was critical of Trump's singular, major legislative victory, playing a central role in the development of the Republican tax overhaul.

Trump's tariff plan has raised widespread concern about sparking trade wars with the US' trading partners, including from Cohn and the president's allies on Capitol Hill.

Trump response

Following the critics' narrative that the White House is in continued chaos, Trump denied the criticism as "fake news", saying on Twitter that "people will always come & go.

"I want strong dialogue before making a final decision. I still have some people that I want to change (always seeking perfection). There is no Chaos, only great Energy!" he said.

The new Fake News narrative is that there is CHAOS in the White House. Wrong! People will always come & go, and I want strong dialogue before making a final decision. I still have some people that I want to change (always seeking perfection). There is no Chaos, only great Energy! — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 6, 2018

Voicing gratitude

After Cohn's departure was made public, Trump struck a thankful tone, saying he "did a superb job".

"Gary has been my chief economic advisor and did a superb job in driving our agenda, helping to deliver historic tax cuts and reforms and unleashing the American economy once again. He is a rare talent, and I thank him for his dedicated service to the American people," Trump said in a statement.

Cohn voiced his gratitude to the president in a statement issued by the White House.

"It has been an honor to serve my country and enact pro-growth economic policies to benefit the American people, in particular the passage of historic tax reform. I am grateful to the President for giving me this opportunity and wish him and the Administration great success in the future," Cohn said.

President Trump’s America First strategy has been working. From his aggressive deregulation of burdensome and unnecessary Obama-era regulations to the continuing success of the Tax Cuts and Jobs Act, the president’s agenda is securing much-needed economic victories on behalf of Americans. But his recent tariff proposals would stall and ultimately undermine the progress he has made.

Trade is essential to a growing, successful economy. When it’s working as it should, trade opens new markets, strengthens international relationships and increases American productivity, while securing domestic industries and American jobs.

Such benefits complement the work President Trump and his administration have already done and would help achieve continuing success for the president and the country.

The president is right to be concerned that some trade deals disadvantage the United States when other countries don’t uphold their end of the deal. Countries like China have exploited trade relationships and should be held accountable.

Putting America First means examining issues thoroughly, anticipating all potential consequences of every decision and appropriately weighting costs versus benefits.

However, imposing across-the-board tariffs would hurt America’s relationships with reliable trading partners and be detrimental to the nation’s economic success.

With Sen. Sherrod Brown, D-Ohio, I introduced the bipartisan United States Foreign Investment Review Act late last year. The legislation would help fulfill President Trump’s America First commitment by equipping the president and his administration with the ability to fight back against unfair trade barriers to U.S. exports and businesses, as well as empowering them to block foreign investment that threatens the United States’ long-term economic interests.

Measures like this would strengthen and promote the president’s agenda, while keeping the country on its current positive economic trajectory. Such measures would help achieve President Trump’s goal of leveling the playing field and enhancing American industry, rather than damaging it with higher prices and an overall decrease of global competitiveness.

Putting America First means examining issues thoroughly, anticipating all potential consequences of every decision and appropriately weighting costs versus benefits.

I detailed my concerns about tariffs – along with Sen. Joni Ernst, R-Iowa, and Iowa Representatives David Young, Rod Blum, Dave Loebsack and Steve King – in a recent letter to President Trump.

I’ve also expressed concerns about any serious changes to the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA), because they could lead to massive job losses and harm to rural America, especially in my home state of Iowa.

Similarly, President Trump’s proposed tariffs of 25 percent on imported steel and 10 percent on aluminum would significantly damage steel-dependent industries in the United States, which employ more than 6 million American workers.

Putting entire industries and millions of family-supporting jobs at risk puts us in a negotiating position we may soon be begging to get out of while inflicting real economic damage in the meantime.

In fact, America has already seen how this scenario plays out. According to data from the U.S. Labor Department, primary metals wholesale prices went from approximately 4 percent deflation to four percent inflation when then-President George W. Bush imposed steel tariffs in 2002. They were also the cause of a 3 percent increase in costs and were ultimately reversed in 2003.

Since January 2017, 2.3 million jobs have been added and the unemployment rate is at a 17-year low of 4.1 percent. U.S. weekly jobless claims are at the lowest level since 1969 and consumer confidence is at its highest level since November 2000.

The economy is on the right track thanks in large part to President Trump’s leadership. But imposing tariffs could wipe away all this progress as quickly as it would take the president to sign his name.

American trade policy would benefit from a stronger position, but it shouldn’t be at the expense of good-faith negotiations with trusted and friendly partners. To truly put America First, the president and his administration need to engage in efforts to secure better, fairer deals that increase U.S. exports and will help create more good-paying jobs for American workers, while unleashing investment and ramping up American innovation.

America First means lowering trade barriers and expanding access to more markets. The positive benefits of a smart, reasonable trade policy will help grow the American economy for generations to come and leave a lasting presidential legacy.

I’m confident that President Trump and his team can negotiate fair deals that will disincentive countries from gaming the system while maintaining the important relationships America has worked hard to cultivate and preserve for decades.

Image copyright Reuters Image caption Terry Bryant carried an Oscar at the Governor's Ball

A man has pleaded not guilty to stealing actress Frances McDormand's Oscar after Sunday's ceremony.

McDormand was named best actress - but her statuette briefly went missing at the lavish after-show Governor's Ball.

Terry Bryant filmed himself holding a statuette and telling other guests he was a winner, before being arrested.

His lawyer Daniel Brookman said: "There's a difference between holding an Oscar and what he is charged with, so that will play out in court."

The 47-year-old had been in police custody on a grand theft charge, but was released without having to pay bail following Wednesday's hearing after the judge ruled he did not pose a flight risk.

Image copyright AFP

Judge Deborah Brazil heard testimony from his rabbi Naomi Levy, who described him as a "sweet, gentle man of faith".

Ms Levy added: "I think we are living in an unusual time in America. I believe that maybe perhaps his story is a commentary on our whole society and its obsession with its 15 minutes of fame."

Police said Mr Bryant was a ticket holder for the Governor's Ball. He was ordered to return to court on 28 March. Los Angeles County District Attorney's Office said he faces up to three years in jail if convicted.

The Oscar was retrieved and later returned to McDormand, who won for her role in Three Billboards Outside Ebbing, Missouri. It's the actress's second Oscar, 21 years after her first for Fargo.

Follow us on Facebook, on Twitter @BBCNewsEnts, or on Instagram at bbcnewsents. If you have a story suggestion email entertainment.news@bbc.co.uk.

Disney’s $100 million gamble to turn the classic children’s book “A Wrinkle in Time” into a politically correct film filled with liberal talking points on feminism and diversity may be backfiring badly, with the poorly reviewed Oprah Winfrey-starring movie possibly teetering toward a tank job at the box office this weekend, according to some predictions.

The film is currently rated a “rotten” 43 percent on “Rotten Tomatoes,” but “woke” cultural critics don’t seem to mind. They say that the movie, directed by anti-Trump filmmaker Ava DuVernay, is so important in terms of its social justice messages that whether it’s a terrible movie or not just doesn’t matter.

Parade Magazine said the film is a “crinkled, jammed, over-crammed hot mess,” but praised the casting of Hollywood's favorite 2020 presidential possibility.

“There’s 20-foot Oprah, and what she represents in America as a self-made black billionaire, media mogul, philanthropist, and a living symbol of survival and success. She radiates empowerment—even when, later in the film, her character ‘shrinks’ down to regular size,” Parade’s Neil Pond wrote.

Madeline L’Engle’s science fantasy novel “A Wrinkle in Time” was published in 1962 and is considered a literary classic. DuVernay’s aggressively uplifting version of the dark, sophisticated novel is far from a straight adaptation, and the obvious differences are deliberate -- at least when it comes to the appearance of several main characters.

“I just wanted a cast that reflects the real world,” DuVernay told CinemaBlend.

The movie’s main character, Meg Murray, is described in the novel as a redheaded girl, but DuVernay cast African-American actress Storm Reid. DuVernay’s Meg is supposed to be biracial, with a white father (played by “Star Trek” actor Chris Pine) and a black mother (played by “Black Mirror" actress Gugu Mbatha-Raw).

DuVernay, who directed the civil rights film "Selma," told the New York Times she selected Australian actor Levi Miller to play Meg’s friend “because that was so powerful, to show a white boy following a black girl” throughout the movie.

“The diversity of its cast is both a welcome innovation and the declaration of a new norm,” the New York Times’ A.O. Scott wrote.

The Federalist applied a more critical eye, with writer James Dawson calling the film “the latest victim of diversity-deranged stunt casting in which no respect is paid to the race or sex of existing literary characters. But that's only one reason why this frustrating fiasco is such an embarrassing failure.”

The film is often billed as “the first $100 million movie directed by an African-American woman,” and DuVernay, who’s well known for her Twitter attacks on President Trump, doesn’t seem to mind if it bombs at the box office.

“I don’t care what anybody thinks about it,” she told the Times. “I know it’s $100 million for the studio. They’ll be fine.”

That’s would be a first for the famously parsimonious Walt Disney Company. According to the New York Observer, "Long-range forecasts initially pegged A Wrinkle in Time for a good-not-great opening between $50 million and $80 million, but now that number has slumped to around $35 million. With a budget north of $100 million and a strong marketing push from the Mouse House, that would be dangerously close to flop territory.”

It would be a rare and painfully expensive misfire for Disney, which has enjoyed a succession of hits by turning beloved fairy tales and children’s books into live action movies such as “The Jungle Book” and “Beauty and the Beast."

(Fox News’ owner, 21st Century Fox, has announced plans to sell its movie assets to Disney should it receive government approval).

It doesn’t help that “A Wrinkle in Time” must compete with “Black Panther,” which in addition to being acclaimed for featuring an overwhelmingly black cast has also gotten stellar reviews just for being a great movie.

As for a “Wrinkle in Time,” cultural critics are trying to look away from the movie's problems and instead fawn over its politicized message. Marie Claire published a headline, “’A Wrinkle in Time’ isn’t a great movie, but that’s completely irrelevant.”

The review by Yolanda Machado features the quote, “Because of this film, my daughter will never question that she can be strong.”

Free Beacon reporter Alex Griswold noticed this has become a common theme, writing that, “If you want insight into why early handpicked reviews for movies are often useless, consider how obviously these reviewers are incapable of saying they thought the movie sucked,” with screen grabs of several similar assessments.

Griswold added, “Even the people out there admitting ‘yeah the movie sucks’ have to go out of their way to talk about how great the people who made it are.”

One reviewer called it a “big bold beautiful mess” before praising DuVernay for “swinging for the fences” with a “not great” script, while another said it “has its flaws” but they’re “secondary to its genuine ambition and earned emotion.”

The Daily Texan added that "the film quickly goes from cringeworthy to crowd pleasing."

Ironically, early reviews based on a trailer were glowing with words such as “gorgeous” used to describe the film lauded as an example of Disney “looking forward, not backward.” However, once critics actually saw “A Wrinkle in Time,” most of the acclaim revolved around risk taking and social justice issues.

“There are few contemporary directors who have been more willing to explore profound social wounds than DuVernay,” NPR’s Linda Holmes wrote.

It seems that DuVernay -- whose Oscar nominated documentary “13th” took a hard-hitting look at the high rate of incarceration for African-Americans -- cares more about advancing social issues than making money for Disney.

"This is a happy movie in a dark time, which is particularly important for young kids, especially young regular girls. They need to know that they can be recognized for just being themselves, they don't have to be Jedis or superheroes," DuVernay recently said, according to The Hollywood Reporter.

“A Wrinkle in Time” hits theaters March 9, with certain theaters showing it on March 8.

Fox News’ Michelle Pollino contributed to this report.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption The US is planning tariffs on metals - but may be hit in kind by other countries

Some countries may be exempt from US plans to impose tariffs on metal imports, the White House has announced.

The exemptions - on national security grounds - included Canada and Mexico, spokeswoman Sarah Sanders said.

Reports, however, suggested the apparent softening of the US stance would last for only 30 days.

US President Donald Trump has said steel products will face a 25% tariff, with 10% on aluminium goods. He is expected to sign the plan on Thursday.

Mr Trump tweeted on Thursday morning that he was "looking forward" to a meeting later in the day on the matter.

Meanwhile, China threatened an "appropriate and necessary response" in any trade war with the US.

Foreign Minister Wang Yi said China and the US should strive to be partners rather than rivals.

The EU has proposed retaliatory measures against a number of US goods including bourbon and peanut butter.

Despite opposition at home and abroad, Ms Sanders said the US president would sign the measures in by the end of the week.

But she added: "There are potential carve-outs for Mexico and Canada based on national security, and possibly other countries as well based on that process. That would be [on] a case-by-case and country by country basis."

President Trump has previously suggested that planned tariffs for Canada and Mexico could be abandoned if a "new and fair" North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta) is signed.

White House trade policy adviser Peter Navarro said on Wednesday that the tariffs would start in 15 to 30 days' time and there would be "a clause that does not impose these tariffs immediately on Canada and Mexico". Both countries knew the president was not "messing around in this", he added.

Why is Mr Trump doing this?

Mr Trump has railed against the US trade deficit, arguing that other countries have been "taking advantage of" the US for decades.

One of his campaign promises was to rebuild the US steel and aluminium industries which he said has suffered "disgraceful" treatment from other countries, in particular cheap Chinese imports.

Last week he dismissed concerns he could trigger a trade war, instead saying "trade wars are good" and were something the US would easily win.

Mr Trump has already hinted he could drop plans to impose tariffs on Mexican and Canadian metals but linked it to the US getting a better deal in the North American Free Trade Agreement (Nafta).

Mexico and Canada are among the main suppliers of steel to the US.

What's the reaction been?

The US plans have sparked worldwide alarm and jolted stock markets.

Critics argue that the tariffs would fail to protect American jobs and would ultimately raise prices for consumers.

More than 100 Republicans on Wednesday signed a letter addressed to the president, expressing their "deep concern" about the tariffs.

The letter referenced a sweeping tax cuts bill Congress and the White House worked to pass last year, arguing that "adding new taxes in the form of broad tariffs would undermine the remarkable progress".

International Monetary Fund chief Christine Lagarde warned "nobody wins" in a trade war, saying it would harm global economic growth.

The EU has set out tit-for-tat plans to impose import duties on bourbon, peanut butter, cranberries, orange juice, steel, and industrial products. Other countries are also considering retaliatory steps.

Members of Mr Trump's Republican party are concerned too, with House Speaker Paul Ryan saying he wanted to see tariffs that were "more surgical and more targeted".

Tuesday saw the departure of top White House economic advisor Gary Cohn, who is a strong supporter of free trade.

Adult film star Stormy Daniels is cashing in on her legal battle with President Trump, as she ramps up a strip club tour across the United States that’s playfully named after Trump’s campaign slogan.

Daniels — whose real name is Stephanie Clifford – made headlines across the globe this week by filing a lawsuit Tuesday against the president, claiming a nondisclosure agreement she signed in 2016 about an alleged relationship they had isn’t valid. The White House denies an affair took place.

Meanwhile, Daniels took the stage Wednesday evening before 100 patrons at Thee DollHouse, a strip club in Myrtle Beach. She’s scheduled to dance again at the same club Thursday night.

She has referred to her cross country strip club appearances on social media as “the make America horny again tour."

The Sun News in Myrtle Beach reported that Daniels wore a USA-themed red, white and blue outfit and danced to Lenny Kravitz's "American Woman" during one performance. Customers paid $20 each for photos with her.

Daniels recently posted on Twitter a list of appearances at 26 different strip clubs, with shows in California, Texas, Florida, Michigan, Louisiana, Tennessee, Illinois, Maryland, New York, Oregon, Colorado, Wisconsin and Massachusetts.

STORMY DANIELS SUES TRUMP, SAYS ‘HUSH AGREEMENT’ IS INVALID BECAUSE HE DIDN’T SIGN IT

Her tour comes as Daniels is keeping her name in the news by filing a lawsuit against Trump in Los Angeles Superior Court on Tuesday alleging a “Hush Agreement.” Daniels, suggesting she wants to talk about her past experiences with Trump, argues her alleged agreement with Trump is invalid because he never signed the document himself.

Daniels and Trump’s personal lawyer, Michael Cohen, signed the non-disclosure agreement on Oct. 28, 2016, the suit said. Trump was elected president less than two weeks later.

A copy of the agreement shows Daniels, identified as “Peggy Peterson,” signed the paperwork, but Trump, identified as “David Dennison,” did not.

The lawsuit claims the two had an “intimate relationship” during the summer of 2006 in Lake Tahoe, and it continued “well into the year 2007.”

“He has denied all these allegations," press secretary Sarah Sanders said during Wednesday’s White House press briefing.

Cohen admitted last month that he paid Daniels $130,000 out of his own pocket in October 2016. He said the payment was lawful and not a campaign contribution or campaign expenditure “by anyone.”

STORMY DANIELS ORDERED BY ARBITRATION JUDGE NOT TO SUE, COHEN’S LAWYER SAYS

An attorney for Cohen told Fox News on Wednesday that Daniels was ordered by an arbitration judge not to sue Trump. Cohen’s attorney argues Daniels violated that by filing her lawsuit Tuesday.

The Wall Street Journal reported this week that the bank used by Cohen to wire the $130,000 to Daniels flagged the transaction as suspicious and reported it to the government.

The adult film actress first detailed her account of an alleged extramarital affair with Trump in 2011 on the celebrity website The Dirty, and it was picked up before the 2016 election by The Smoking Gun.

Fox News’ Nicole Darrah and Brooke Singman contributed to this report.

Canada would view any tariffs on steel or aluminum as unacceptable and will take appropriate measures to defend workers and industries if needed, Foreign Minister Chrystia Freeland said on Monday.

The latest trade deal talks with her Mexican and US counterparts have ended in Mexico City with little success.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has told President Donald Trump tariffs will hinder renegotiation of the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).

Al Jazeera's John Holman has more.

article

Trade ministers from 11 Pacific Rim countries signed a sweeping free trade agreement Thursday to streamline trade and slash tariffs on the same day that President Donald Trump was expected to formalize new tariffs on aluminum and steel to protect U.S. producers.

Continue Reading Below

Trump withdrew the U.S. from the Trans-Pacific Partnership last year, causing fears that it would not prosper without its most influential country. But the remaining 11 members pressed ahead, saying they were showing resolve against protectionism through global trade.

The ministers dropped key provisions that the Americans had required on protection of intellectual property, among others. The renegotiated pact signed in Chile's capital was also renamed the Comprehensive and Progressive Trans-Pacific Partnership, or CPTPP.

The pact that covers 500 million people includes Australia, Brunei, Canada, Chile, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, New Zealand, Peru, Singapore and Vietnam. Its success highlights the isolation of the U.S. under Trump's protectionist rhetoric on trade and his "America first" philosophy.

"It leaves the U.S. at a disadvantage from both a trade and a broader strategic perspective," said Joshua Meltzer, senior fellow in the global economy and development program at the Brookings Institution. "It is now a trade bloc that discriminates against the U.S."

Meltzer said the United States' ability to shape the rules of trade in the Asia-Pacific region "is very much diminished."

The U.S., originally the biggest TPP economy, was one of the trade deal's strongest supporters before Trump took office. Trump has said he prefers country-to-country deals and is seeking to renegotiate several major trade agreements, including the North American Free Trade Agreement that includes the U.S., Mexico and Canada.

This is "a strong sign against the protectionist pressures, and in favor of a world open to free trade, without unilateral sanctions and the threat of trade wars," Chilean Foreign Minister Heraldo Munoz said.

The European Union said this week that it is ready to retaliate against Trump's tariffs — of 25 percent on imported steel and 10 percent on aluminum imports — with counter-measures against iconic U.S. products like Harley Davidson motorcycles, Levi's jeans and bourbon.

The EU threat and Trump's impending announcement on the tariffs were expected to escalate the risk of a trade war, in which nations try to punish each other by hiking taxes on traded goods. Experts say that tends to harm both exporting nations as well as importing countries' consumers, who face higher costs.

The EU considers itself to be caught in the crossfire of a trade dispute, in which Trump has mainly singled out China for being unfair in its commercial deals.

The original TPP was conceived by the U.S. as a counterweight to China's growing economic influence through a robust trading bloc that excluded the Asian giant. The thinking was that China would have an incentive to open its market and liberalize its policies in an effort to eventually qualify for TPP membership.

"Without the United States, it doesn't serve that purpose," said Edward Alden, senior fellow at the Council on Foreign Relations. "It becomes a modest liberalization measure."

China's foreign minister, Wang Yi, commented Thursday on the deal before it was signed.

"China did not participate in the CPTPP Agreement. However, China has always been a staunch supporter of trade liberalization and an important participant in Asia-Pacific regional cooperation and economic integration," Wang Yi said at a news conference.

"Of course, we also hope that the various free trade arrangements in the Asia-Pacific region will be able to communicate and coordinate with each other and form a benign interaction, playing a constructive role in their respective fields in resisting trade protectionism and building an open world economy."

___

Associated Press writer Eva Vergara reported this story in Santiago and AP writer Luis Andres Henao reported from Buenos Aires, Argentina. AP writers Paul Wiseman in Washington and Joe McDonald in Beijing contributed to this report.

Image copyright San Bernardino Sheriff's Office

A 14-year-old California boy has been arrested for allegedly posing as a sheriff's deputy while driving a car with emergency lights, police say.

The teenager allegedly pulled over a car, and after "obtaining the female's information he gave her a warning and let her go", California police said.

He also allegedly visited two homes, claiming to be responding to a domestic disturbance call.

He was later detained while driving a vehicle owned by his great grandmother.

The San Bernardino County Sheriff's Department said the teenager, who has not been identified due to his age, had mounted red and blue flashing lights to the windscreen of his great-grandmother's Ford Explorer SUV and wore what appeared to be a real handgun.

He was arrested on Tuesday at the High Desert Juvenile Detention Center, according to the Victorville Police Department.

In addition to stopping at least one driver on Monday night, the boy also allegedly visited a home and told its owner he there to investigate a "reported domestic disturbance," according to a police press release.

The boy was told there had been no call, and then tried to open the locked door after homeowner had closed it on him, according to police.

"For me, I was like, 'That's not normal. Do cops do that?'" Jasmine Jones, who lives at the residence, told KTLA-News.

"I saw the police uniform and I thought, 'That just doesn't look right,'" she said.

"It's loose, and the belt buckle isn't staying on his hips."

He also allegedly visited another home and activated his lights, causing a 16-year-old boy to leave his home.

He again claimed to be investigating a domestic disturbance and left after being informed there had not been a call, police said.

During a later search of the boy's home, investigators said they discovered a San Bernardino County Sheriff's Department uniform he allegedly wore.

Detectives also found "a large amount of counterfeit money, simulations firearms, ballistic vests, and other law enforcement related items".

The boy was already on probation, and has now been booked into the High Desert Juvenile Detention Center.
