
More ADventures Headlines

Nielsen sues comScore to block new TV ratings service NEW YORK Nielsen Holdings Plc filed a lawsuit on Friday to stop comScore Inc from using its technology to launch a competing service for measuring television audiences.

Facebook to overhaul political ads after threat of U.S. regulation SAN FRANCISCO Facebook Inc on Thursday launched an overhaul of how it handles paid political advertisements, giving a concession to U.S. lawmakers who have threatened to regulate the world's largest social network over secretive ads that run during election campaigns. |

Trump dismisses Facebook ads controversy as part of 'Russia hoax' WASHINGTON U.S. President Donald Trump on Friday questioned Facebook Inc's decision to overhaul how it handles paid political advertisements amid investigations into alleged Russian interference in U.S. elections. |

Time Inc in talks to sell assets; warns on third-quarter ad revenue softness Time Inc said on Friday it was looking to sell several assets, including Time Inc UK, and warned it experienced more-than-anticipated softness in both print and advertising revenue during the current quarter.

Kremlin: Russia did not use Facebook adverts to sway U.S. election MOSCOW Russia did not place adverts on Facebook Inc to try to influence the 2016 U.S. Presidential election, Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said on Friday.

Australia's Seven West Media says Prime takeover offer falls through SYDNEY Top Australian television broadcaster Seven West Media Ltd and smaller Prime Media Group Ltd said they held takeover talks which ended without a deal, a faltering start to likely media consolidation brought on by deregulation.

EU eyes solo move to increase tax on online giants, risking U.S. anger BRUSSELS The European Commission said on Thursday it may seek to implement tax reform to raise more revenue from online giants without the backing of the United States and other rich nations, in a move that could spark a new transatlantic dispute.

Twitter to meet Congressional panel probing 2016 election Twitter Inc representatives will meet with the U.S. Senate Select Committee on Intelligence staff next week in relation to inquiries into the 2016 U.S. presidential election, a company representative said.

Democrats seek disclosure after Russia-backed political ads Democratic U.S. lawmakers on Wednesday urged the Federal Election Commission to require transparency for social media advertising after Russians bought U.S. political ads on Facebook Inc in an alleged attempt to influence the 2016 elections.

Facebook to add more human review to ad system: COO Sandberg SAN FRANCISCO Facebook Inc will add "more human review and oversight" to its ad-buying system, Chief Operating Officer Sheryl Sandberg said on Wednesday, responding to rising criticism that automated processes have allowed people to buy discriminatory ads.

EU ready to move alone on digital tax if no global deal BRUSSELS The European Commission said the EU should proceed with an overhaul of taxes on digital firms even if the rest of the rich world did not follow suit, a draft report said.

U.S. appeals court blocks San Francisco ordinance on soda health warnings SAN FRANCISCO A U.S. appeals court sided with the beverage industry on Tuesday, granting its request to block a San Francisco ordinance mandating health warnings for soda and other sugary drinks.

App Annie's new product offers insight into consumer trends in China FRANKFURT The pioneer of mobile app analytics, App Annie, on Tuesday said it has begun tracking Android app usage in China, a landmark for understanding consumer behavior in the world's top smartphone market, which increasingly sets the pace for global trends.

Google disables offensive ad keywords found by BuzzFeed Alphabet Inc's Google said it had disabled a "majority" of the offensive keywords that BuzzFeed found could be used by advertisers to target people searching for racist and anti-Semitic topics.

Vivendi notified Italy government about its holding in Telecom Italia: source PARIS Vivendi notified the Italian government on Friday about its holding in Telecom Italia as required by the authorities, a source close to the matter said.

Facebook removes feature that let ads reach 'Jew haters' SAN FRANCISCO Facebook Inc said on Thursday it was temporarily disabling the ability of advertisers to target based on people's self-reported education and job information after a report that those features allowed targeting based on anti-Semitic topics.

Facebook to launch election integrity effort in Canada TORONTO Facebook Inc , under pressure over its role in possible Russian meddling in last year's U.S. presidential election, said it plans an election integrity initiative to protect Canada's next vote from cyber threats.

Canada would view any tariffs on steel or aluminum as unacceptable and will take appropriate measures to defend workers and industries if needed, Foreign Minister Chrystia Freeland said on Monday.

The latest trade deal talks with her Mexican and US counterparts have ended in Mexico City with little success.

Prime Minister Justin Trudeau has told President Donald Trump tariffs will hinder renegotiation of the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA).

Al Jazeera's John Holman has more.

Leaked emails show that a businessman with ties to the United Arab Emirates (UAE) tried to convince US President Donald Trump to fire Secretary of State Rex Tillerson for not supporting the UAE-backed blockade of Qatar, the BBC reported.

According to the emails obtained by the news outlet, Elliott Broidy, who is also a major Trump fundraiser, met President Donald Trump in October 2017 and lobbied against the top US diplomat for "performing poorly".

The emails appear to confirm earlier reports of the existence of a memo by Broidy, allegedly confirming attempts to implement US policies in favour of the UAE.

Saudi Arabia, the UAE, Egypt and Bahrain severed diplomatic and transport ties with Qatar on June 5, accusing it of supporting "terrorism". Qatar has repeatedly rejected the allegations as "baseless".

Tillerson criticised urged Saudi Arabia and other Gulf and Arab states to ease the blockade, which contradicted what appeared to be Trump's initial support for the move.

In the emails, Broidy calls Tillerson "a tower of Jello" and says the secretary of state "needs to be slammed", the BBC reported.

He also criticises Qatar, calling it a "television station with a country". Broidy has been a vocal opponent of Al Jazeera.

Broidy says Trump thought it was a "good idea" to schedule a meeting with Mohammed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, the crown prince of Abu Dhabi.

A spokesman for Broidy told US media that the businessman has "reason to believe" Qatar hacked his emails. Qatar denied the allegations.

According to the New York Times, Broidy owns a company that has hundreds of millions of dollars in contracts with the UAE.

Mueller investigation

{articleGUID}

Emails regarding Broidy's meeting with Trump were sent to George Nader, a Lebanese-American businessman and adviser to the de facto ruler of the UAE.

{articleGUID}

According to the New York Times, Nader was questioned by Special Counsel Robert Mueller about his ties to the UAE and his meetings with White House officials.

Nader was asked "for information about any possible attempts by the Emiratis to buy political influence by directing money to support Mr Trump during the presidential campaign, according to people who knowledge of the discussions," the newspaper reported earlier this week.

Mueller is investigating alleged Russian interference in the US 2016 presidential elections.

Nader, who is described as a White House regular, allegedly took part in discussions of American foreign policy in the Gulf region with then-chief strategist Stephen Bannon and senior adviser Jared Kushner, who is also Trump's son-in-law, shortly after Trump took office.

Analysts say the reports show the extent of influence the UAE may have in Washington.

"It seems as though the Emiratis have invested so much," Mohammed Cherkaoui, a professor at George Washington University, told Al Jazeera.

"There is now this overconfidence they can have their way in the US administration," he said.

"What is alarming is not an act of regular or natural lobbying that is part of the game in Washington, but that you have two agents trying to establish a direct link between Trump and Mohammed bin Zayed."

The Washington Post reported last month that four countries, including the UAE, may have attempted to exploit Kushner's lack of experience and his family's business debt to influence the US administration's policies.

Britain has stepped up its investigation into the possible poisoning of former Russian spy Sergei Skripal in Salisbury, England, with the U.K. government facing the possibility of yet another Russian dissident being assassinated on British soil.

On Sunday, 66-year-old Sergei Skripal, a former colonel in the Russian military intelligence, was found unconscious on a bench at a mall in Salisbury, along with his 33-year-old daughter, Yulia. As of Tuesday, the two were still in critical condition, being treated “for suspected exposure to an unknown substance.”

Skripal was sentenced to prison by Russia in 2006 for spying for Britain. In 2010 he was given refuge in the U.K. as part of a “spy swap” with the United States.

Britain’s counterterrorism unit took over the investigation Tuesday from local law enforcement because of its “unusual circumstances.” Samples from the scene were being tested at a military research laboratory, The Guardian reported. The police had not declared it a terrorist incident, and law enforcement officials were still investigating whether a crime occurred.

British Foreign Secretary Boris Johnson said Tuesday that, although it was “too early to speculate” about what happened to Skripal and his daughter, Britain would “respond appropriately and robustly” if the Russian government were found to be responsible, the Press Association reported. The Kremlin has denied having any information about the incident.

Boris Johnson warns Russia it will be 'punished' if found responsible for Sergei and Yulia Skripal incident https://t.co/JhLNko6wCE — HuffPost UK (@HuffPostUK) March 6, 2018

If the incident is found to be a poisoning attempt by the Russians, it would join a long history of suspected assassinations of Russian dissidents abroad, and specifically in the U.K.

The incident has recalled the high-profile assassination in 2006 of another Russian spy, former KGB officer Alexander Litvinenko, poisoned in London. A 2016 inquiry by the British government found Russian agency FSB (which succeeded the KGB) had Litvinenko killed in an operation “probably approved” by Russian President Vladimir Putin. The Kremlin has repeatedly denied involvement.
