-0.299*"gun" + -0.189*"north" + -0.176*"nra" + -0.158*"korea" + 0.146*"helicopter" + -0.145*"school" + -0.141*"kim" + -0.137*"guns" + -0.133*"korean" + 0.116*"her"

====================================
0: 0.608499
https://www.usatoday.com
O.J. Simpson reveals 'hypothetical' murder details in 2006 Fox interview
CLOSE 'O.J. Simpson: The Lost Confession' Executive Producer Terence Wrong discusses the recently found 2006 interview that will air on Fox Sunday night (March 9) AP

'O.J. Simpson: The Lost Confession,' a 2006 interview with the accused but not convicted murderer, airs tonight on Fox. (Photo: Fox)

In an interview that has been under wraps for 12 years, O.J. Simpson offered a "hypothetical" explanation for the 1994 murders of ex-wife Nicole Simpson and Ron Goldman.

Fox aired a two-hour special, O.J. Simpson: The Lost Confession?, in which an interview Simpson did in 2006 with publisher Judith Regan was repackaged and broadcast for the first time Sunday night.

"This is one story the whole world got wrong," Simpson says in the intro.

The program begins with Simpson discussing the history of physical altercations he had with his ex-wife. According to prosecuting attorney Christopher Darden, police had been to their house "multiple times" to respond to domestic disputes.

"Nicole left for us the diary, notes, photographs. She documented the abuse," Darden says in a panel discussion in between segments of the Simpson interview. "My sense is that she knew she was going to die and she wanted to make sure we knew who killed her."

After one particular incident in 1989, Simpson was convicted of spousal abuse after beating Brown so severely that she required hospital treatment.

"The one thing that hurts me as much as anything in this — aside from being considered a murderer — is being a batterer," Simpson says. "Somehow, I came out of all of that because of that night as the poster boy of an abuser."

June 12, 1994

Both O.J. and Nicole Simpson attended a recital for one of their daughters, but afterward he wasn't invited to a group dinner at the Mezzaluna restaurant where waiter Ron Goldman worked.

Simpson, who never took the stand at his criminal trial and has never given an interview about his actions on the night of the murders, describes what happened next -- but only in a "hypothetical" sense.

("He felt if he could claim 'hypothetical' at this point, he would have deniability with the children," Regan says on the panel discussion.)

Simpson says he and a friend named Charlie - who he had known for a few weeks - went to Nicole's house later that evening.

"In the hypothetical, I put on a cap and gloves," he says. He gets a knife from under the seat of his car. "I always kept a knife in that car for the crazies and stuff because you can't travel with a gun."

More: Can O.J. Simpson keep a low profile now that he's out of prison?

More: What's next for O.J. Simpson?

While Simpson was there, Goldman arrived to return a pair of glasses left at the restaurant. The two men argued and Nicole came out of the house because of the commotion. He says Nicole fell and hurt herself.

"At that time, I think Charlie had followed this guy in, to make sure there was no problem, and he brought in the knife," Simpson says.

Moments later, "this guy kind of got into a karate thing, and I said, 'Well, you think you can kick my (expletive)?' " Simpson continues. "I took the knife from Charlie, and to be honest, after that, I don't remember, except I'm standing there and there's all kinda stuff around. Blood and stuff.

"I didn't think any two people could be murdered the way they were without everybody covered in blood. We've all seen the grisly pictures after. Everything was covered in blood."

("I think he's confessed to murder," Darden says during a break in the interview. "I don't think there's any question that he's the person who's wielding the knife. ... This is no hypothetical. This is reality.")

Simpson admits he took off his shoes, pants and shirt and put them in a bundle. "Somebody had to get rid of the bloody clothes," he says.

After leaving Los Angeles for a business trip to Chicago, Simpson returned to a media circus and was questioned by police.

The hardest part?

"It seemed so easy listening to TV that week that it was that easy for people to believe that I could kill two people. I thought my whole life meant something," Simpson says. "It was hard for me to accept that people would believe that."

The Bronco chase

Once Simpson became a suspect and it came time to turn himself in to authorities, he was a no-show. But he left behind a note that addressed his relationship with Nicole: "If we had a problem, it's because I loved her so much."

In the interview, Simpson says he was considering suicide when he disappeared with his friend Al Cowlings in a white Ford Bronco.

TV helicopters found the vehicle and for more than two hours, Cowlings drove Simpson along the freeways around Los Angeles as police gave chase.

"I'm in the back of the truck and I can't believe what I'm seeing. Everytime we go by intersections ... where did these people get the time to make these signs? 'Go O.J.' and stuff," he says. "What was strange is I was being depicted as a fugitive on the radio, but on the sides of the road it was people cheering."

The verdict

Simpson was taken into custody and at the end of a memorable 11-month trial. Simpson was acquitted of double murder in 1995 in what widely was known as the "Trial of the Century."

"I felt that if there was anything right with the universe, there's no way they can convict me of this," he tells Regan. "And we're not talking hypothetical here. That's how I felt."

At the conclusion of the interview Simpson is asked how he thinks he will be remembered.

"Everybody is going to give their opinion. They're going to hypothesize what this book means," he says. "Whatever you want to take from it, I cannot control it. Whichever reason why I did it, you decide. You read it. You decide."

Epilogue

The original 2006 special, If I Did It, was a companion to Simpson's book of the same name, which Regan edited. When the victims' families balked that Simpson would have profited from its airing and several Fox stations and advertisers pulled out, the show was not run. Fox chief Rupert Murdoch later admitted it was "an ill-considered project."

About 45 minutes of the special were screened for media Thursday.

Simpson was convicted in civil court in 1997 and ordered to pay $33 million as part of a wrongful death suit.

Simpson, now 70, was convicted in 2008 on felony charges of armed robbery and kidnapping, but was granted parole and released from a Nevada prison on Oct. 1, 2017.

Follow Gardner on Twitter @SteveAGardner

====================================
1: 0.571626
http://www.latimes.com
Welcome to California, President Trump! Now skip the wall and let us educate you
I'd like Trump to know that in between his San Diego and Beverly Hills events, I'm available for a round of golf. I haven't hit a ball in years, so I might not offer much competition. But I can offer the perspective of someone who was born in California with grandparents from Spain and Italy, and has been told on many occasions to go back to Mexico. I can also explain to Trump why he got trounced in California by Hillary Clinton.

====================================
2: 0.570304
https://www.usatoday.com
If Toys R Us goes away, where will shoppers go?
CLOSE Take a trip back to your younger days with one of the nation's best-known retail chains. USA TODAY

(FILES) This November 24, 2011 file photo shows shoppers as they leave the Toys-R-Us store in Fairfax, Virginia. Regulators fined 10 investment firms a total of $43.5 million for promising positive write-ups on toystore chain Toys"R"Us in exchange for lucrative investment banking business. The Financial Industry Regulatory Authority said the firms "offered favorable research coverage" in 2010 in exchange for a role in an initial public offering of the company. Toys"R"Us subsequently cancelled plans for the IPO. AFP PHOTO / Paul J. RichardsPAUL J. RICHARDS/AFP/Getty Images ORIG FILE ID: 536090987 (Photo: PAUL J. RICHARDS, AFP/Getty Images)

For generations of parents, Toys R Us was the go-to destination to reward a child after scoring the winning soccer goal or to track down the hot plaything for the holidays.

But if the superstore chain doesn't find a buyer or win a last-minute reprieve, Toys R Us is expected to file for Chapter 7 bankruptcy liquidation next week. And that means many parents and kids alike will have to head elsewhere.

The truth is, many already have. The original big-box toy seller had in recent years fallen behind Amazon and Walmart when it came to being the top destination for families seeking games and gadgets. And Target has been hard on its heels.

More: Toys R Us timeline: History of the nation's top toy chain

More: Toys R Us preparing for liquidation, sources say

More: How Chapter 7 liquidation works: Toys R Us preps going-out-of-business sales

"The ongoing sales declines at Toys R Us suggest consumers find other options viable,'' says Greg Portell, lead partner in the retail practice of A.T. Kearney, a global strategy and management consulting firm.

Still, the disappearance of Toys R Us, an $11 billion retailer, would be felt.

"Toys R Us is certainly the retailer of choice for a lot of consumers,'' Portell says. "If it happens, this shouldn't be viewed as an inconsequential liquidation. If the typical toy purchase is $100, we are talking about over 100 million purchase occasions that will move. Shoppers will notice.''

Amazon, Walmart and Target, which were already peeling away so many of Toys R Us' shoppers, are likely to become the prime alternatives if Toys R Us completely exits the scene. But it's less clear whether any other retailers can become the sentimental favorite that Toys R Us was for so long.

"Your child had a great report card and you would take them to Toys R Us and get them a gift,'' said Jim Silver, editor of the toy review website TTPM and a veteran toy expert who has followed Toys R Us for more than 30 years. "They had a great soccer match, you take them to Toys R Us. Where are you going to take them to pick out that gift?”

One thing shoppers shouldn't fear is prices spiking if Toys R Us disappears. The store chain has often been more expensive than its rivals. Walmart, Amazon and Target often offered toys at steeper discounts to entice shoppers who would then scoop up their other, higher-priced products in other sections of their stores.

That's not been an option for Toys R Us, what has been known in the retail world as a "category killer" entirely focused as being a one-stop destination for playthings for kids of all ages.

"There is so much competition among other toys retailers,'' says Neil Saunders, managing director of retail consultancy GlobalData. "As most products and brands can be easily compared across retailers, price will remain an important factor in driving . . . loyalty.''

Other players are waiting in the wings. Kohl’s and J.C. Penney have been expanding their toy departments in anticipation of more Toys R Us store closings. Party supply chain Party City, which recently hired former Toys R Us vice president Jamie Uitdenhowen, is also expected to beef up its toy offerings, Silver said.

There's also a chance that a new toy store chain could move to the U.S. from abroad if Toys R Us departs, Silver says.

While new arrivals wouldn't be able to establish a national or global footprint on par with Toys R Us anytime soon, they could carve out niches in local communities or online.

"Similar to the resurgence of local book stores, there are great opportunities for sharply curated local options,'' says Portell. "Consumers enjoy high touch, personal experiences. Local toy stores are increasingly providing that option.''



Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2GgvAV8

====================================
3: 0.55042
https://www.usatoday.com
Middle Tennessee among the 7 biggest NCAA tournament snubs
CLOSE SportsPulse: Trysta Krick runs through surprises, snubs and other highlights from Selection Sunday as March Madness officially begins. USA TODAY Sports

Head coach Kermit Davis of the Middle Tennessee Blue Raiders reacts to a call by the officials during the first half of the semi-final game of the Diamond Head Classic against the USC Trojans. (Photo: Darryl Oumi, Getty Images)

Middle Tennessee coach Kermit Davis thinks this year’s team is better than last year’s team that knocked off Minnesota in the first round of the NCAAs and 2016’s team that pulled off perhaps the greatest bracket-buster of all-time in an upset of Michigan State as a No. 15 seed.

“I think we have a Sweet 16 team,” Davis told USA TODAY Sports by phone. “That’s the frustrating part, you know you have a team that’s built for the second-weekend, but you’ve got to get that opportunity.”

THE BRACKET: See all the NCAA tournament matchups | Printable

REGION CAPSULES: East | Midwest | South | West

BIGGEST SNUBS: Seven teams that had strong case to make NCAA field

BRACKET ANALYSIS: Selection committee valued early wins, not late failures

The Blue Raiders, sadly, won’t get the opportunity to play Cinderella again this year, and were one of the first teams left out of the field of 68 as a notable snub on Selection Sunday. MTSU (24-7) lacked marquee wins, but had the most true road wins of any team in the country (12), presented a top-10 non-conference strength of schedule and held a 33 RPI.

Middle Tennessee's Nick King would have been a March star had the Blue Raiders made the NCAAs. (Photo: Jim Brown, USA TODAY Sports)

“We did exactly what the selection committee wanted us to do,” Davis said. “We did everything we possibly could. Of course, we’d like to have more wins (the Blue Raiders lost one-possession games to Auburn, USC and Miami). At our level, it’s trying to be literally perfect. …It is a tough world we live in (as a mid-major conference member). It’s a grind for us because you cannot slip up one bit. You lose just one game to a C-USA team and then all the pundits put us out.”

It was likely the Blue Raiders’ early Conference USA tourney exit to Southern Mississippi, a gigantic résumé stain, that knocked them out of the NCAA field. Two losses to eventual tourney champ Marshall, a team that went down-to-the-wire against Xavier, didn’t help MTSU’s cause but were way less costly. Middle Tennessee had won 11 games in a row and was playing some of its best basketball before losing to Marshall in the regular-season finale on March 3 and Southern Miss. this past week.

“We just had a six-day period where we weren’t playing our best basketball offensively,” Davis said. “It just happened at the wrong time. You hope you can be judged based on an entire season instead of a six-day period by the committee, but unfortunately those two losses (were costly).”

Davis had his team practice on Friday, with the idea that the Blue Raiders would be playing Tuesday regardless — in the NCAAs for a play-in game in Dayton or the NIT as a No. 1 seed for a home game. Unfortunately, it turned out to be the latter.

Here’s a look at six other teams that got snubbed the selection committee this March.

USC came up short in the Pac-12 tourney championship for an auto-bid, and now is NIT-bound. (Photo: Stephen R. Sylvanie, USA TODAY Sports)

Southern California

The biggest head-scratcher of Selection Sunday — outside of Syracuse making the field — is how the Trojans (23-11, 12-6) got snubbed, especially after reaching the Pac-12 tournament final before falling to Arizona. UCLA, which beat the Trojans twice, got in. USC had a 34 RPI. this pick is a testament to the committee paying no attention to conference standings, where USC finished second behind only Arizona and proved to be the second-best team in the league in the tournament in Vegas. The committee instead honored a team that struggled in the Pac 12, Arizona State, based on a pretty non-conference portfolio.

Saint Mary's

Coach Randy Bennett's team has been here before. And once again, a weak schedule is the culprit to a snub. Of the Gaels’ 28 wins, 24 of them came against teams outside the top 100. Just breathe that in. Saint Mary’s (28-5, 16-2) beat Gonzaga but its RPI in the 40s and strength of schedule in the 160s weren't enough to make up for the lack of marquee victories on this deceiving profile.

Heartbreak: Notre Dame, which suffered an injury-plagued season, was the first team out of the field on Sunday. (Photo: Brad Penner, USA TODAY Sports)

Notre Dame

Notre Dame was the team knocked out by Davidson's last-second win against Rhode Island in the Atlantic 10 final, according to the committee chair Bruce Rasmussen — surely a hard pill for this group to swallow. The Fighting Irish (20-14, 8-10) might have needed one more marquee win to punch their ticket and came up short against Duke in the ACC tourney quarterfinals. Coach Mike Krzyzewski said after that game, “I hope they can get in because I think they can beat anybody.” Notre Dame was a completely different team since Bonzie Colson, a preseason All-American, came back from injury. But as lenient as the committee can be to injuries (ND lost seven in a row with Colson out), it still wasn't enough, as it was hard to rationalize Notre Dame’s résumé (RPI in the 60s, non-conference strength of schedule of 170, just two Q1 wins) over some of the at-large candidates that snuck in.

Marquette

The Golden Eagles (19-13, 9-9 Big East) have an RPI in the 50s and non-conference strength of schedule of 137, but the Big East Conference figured to be a saving grace, as it made their overall SoS top-25. There’s no good eye candy on the résumé as far as marquee victories go, but Marquette did have two victories over fellow bubble team Creighton, which squeaked into the field of 68. Did the wrong Big East team get in?

Louisville

The Cardinals (20-13, 9-9 ACC) likely had their season dashed on a buzzer-beating loss to Virginia on March 1. They managed to beat Florida State in the ACC tourney but there’s still not enough meat on this profile (just three top-50 wins). There are no bad losses and an RPI in the 30s to make a serious case, but Louisville just didn’t capitalize on the many Quadrant 1 opportunities it had in the ACC, and that’s something the committee will harp on.

Oklahoma State

The Cowboys (19-14, 8-10) swept Kansas in the regular season — a feat that looks all the more better following the Jayhawks’ impressive Big 12 tournament title and No. 1 NCAA seed status. OSU also has wins over West Virginia and Texas Tech. Ah, the luxuries of playing in the Big 12. But that served as a doubled edged sword that came in the form of a stretch that saw OSU lose seven of 10. That and the rest of the Cowboys’ portfolio is relatively bare. There are no bad losses on this résumé, but no other bubble team had an RPI in the 80s (flirting with the 90s) and a staggeringly ugly non-conference strength of schedule of 295. Baylor also didn't make it from the Big 12, but the Cowboys were ahead of the Bears on USA TODAY Sports' final bracketology.

***

NCAA tourney language explainer

Quadrant 1 wins : Home games vs. 1-30 RPI teams; Neutral-site games vs. 1-50 RPI; Away games vs. 1-75 RPI

: Home games vs. 1-30 RPI teams; Neutral-site games vs. 1-50 RPI; Away games vs. 1-75 RPI Quadrant 2 wins : Home games vs. 31-75 RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 51-100 RPI; Away games vs. 76-135 RPI

: Home games vs. 31-75 RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 51-100 RPI; Away games vs. 76-135 RPI Quadrant 3 wins, losses : Home games vs. 76-160 RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 101-200 RPI; Away games vs. 136-240 RPI

: Home games vs. 76-160 RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 101-200 RPI; Away games vs. 136-240 RPI Quadrant 4 wins, losses: Home games vs. 161-plus RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 201-plus RPI; Away games vs. 241-plus RPI

**

Follow college basketball reporter Scott Gleeson on Twitter @ScottMGleeson.

AUTO BIDS: NCAA TOURNEY-BOUND TEAMS

====================================
4: 0.508805
https://www.usatoday.com
Greek soccer game abandoned after 'armed' owner protests decision
PAOK owner Ivan Savvidis approaches AEK Athens' Vassilis Dimitriadis (center) as his bodyguard and players try to stop him. (Photo: Uncredited, AP)

ATHENS, Greece (AP) — A disputed goal at the end of a Greek league match on Sunday between leader AEK and title rival PAOK led to a pitch invasion by one of the team owners, who appeared to be carrying a gun.

Fernando Varela scored in the 90th minute, putting host PAOK ahead 1-0 in the northern city of Thessaloniki. The referee signaled a goal but then seemed to disallow it for offside.

PAOK's owner, businessman Ivan Savvidis, came on the field twice and was accompanied by bodyguards. On the second occasion, without the overcoat he was wearing before, Savvidis appeared to be carrying a pistol which was in its holder. Savvidis made no move to use the weapon at any time.

AEK officials claimed Savvidis threatened the referee during his first foray onto the pitch, before being pulled away. They claim he also threatened AEK's operations manager, Vassilis Dimitriadis. AEK said it will file a complaint with FIFA and UEFA, the world and European soccer governing bodies.

PAOK said in a statement: "After what happened today, PAOK chairman Ivan Savvidis is preparing all necessary procedures to protect the team and all his collaborators from the threats and attacks they have been subjected to. There will be relevant announcements on the issue soon."

The game was finally abandoned after more than two hours and the stadium emptied of fans. Adding to the widespread confusion, there were claims that the referee, Giorgos Kominis, had actually allowed the goal. The score at the time of abandonment remains uncertain — 0-0 or 1-0 to PAOK — with the referee's report still to come.

MORE SOCCER:

AEK claimed that the atmosphere had become too threatening for the game to resume, while the referee was reportedly in favor of resuming.

Earlier, AEK coach Manolo Jimenez had been sent to the stands, in the 83rd minute, for constantly complaining.

PAOK's previous home game — against another title rival, Olympiakos — never started after Olympiakos coach Oscar Garcia was hit in the face by a cash register paper roll.

The latest incident has thrown the outcome of the season into further disarray.

"Images of team owners invading the pitch armed are setting back soccer for years," Deputy Culture Minister for Sports Giorgos Vasileiadis said in a statement after the game. After claiming that the current season was the "cleanest and most exciting" because of the government's attempt to clean up the game, Vasileiadis said "we will not allow anyone to divert us from our task, even if we have to, in consultation with UEFA, to take difficult decisions." That has been widely interpreted as a threat to suspend the entire league.

After the non-starter against Olympiakos, PAOK was fined and deducted three points, the game was declared a 3-0 victory for Olympiakos and PAOK was due to have played its next two home games in front of empty stands. But an appeals panel decided early Sunday morning to void the points deduction and to allow PAOK to play inside a full stadium, although the result remained in Olympiakos' favor.

PAOK says it will appeal again, demanding that the game with Olympiakos takes place.

Olympiakos itself is appealing a decision that had deducted three points from the team for fan behavior in a Feb. 4 home game against AEK, which it lost 2-1. The appeal hearing has been delayed at least twice, and the current Greek league standings do not reflect any of the current sanctions.

If a PAOK official is judged to have threatened the referee as well as the AEK official, the team could potentially face relegation.

In soccer games which finished Sunday, Olympiakos won 4-0 at last-place Platanias, Xanthi beat Panetolikos 1-0 and Levadiakos drew 1-1 at Lamia.

Copyright 2018 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.