Amelia earhart

====================================
0: 0.994678
http://www.bbc.com/news/world/us_and_canada
Amelia Earhart: Island bones 'likely' belonged to famed pilot
Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Researchers used photographs and clothing to determine that the bones match

Bones discovered on a Pacific island in 1940 "likely" belonged to famed pilot Amelia Earhart, according to a US peer reviewed science journal.

Earhart, her plane, and her navigator vanished without a trace in 1937 over the Pacific Ocean. Many theories have sought to explain her disappearance.

But a new study published in Forensic Anthropology claims these bones prove she died as an island castaway.

The report claims they are a 99% match, despite an earlier conclusion.

The study, titled Amelia Earhart and the Nikumaroro Bones, was first published by the University of Florida and conducted by Professor Richard Jantz from the University of Tennessee.

It disputes that the remains found on the eastern Pacific island of Nikumaroro - about 1,800 miles (2,900km) southwest of Hawaii - belonged to a man, as a researcher had determined in 1941.

Earhart was known to have been near the island when she vanished during her doomed attempt to fly across the globe.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Earhart was perhaps the most famous woman in the world when she vanished

A British party exploring the island for habitation in 1940 found a human skull, a woman's shoe, a Navy tool used by her navigator Fred Noonan (who also vanished), and a bottle of the herbal liqueur Benedictine - "something Earhart was known to carry".

"There was suspicion at the time that the bones could be the remains of Amelia Earhart," Dr Jantz wrote in the study.

The party found a total of 13 bones, which were then sent to Fiji to be analysed by Dr D W Hoodless, who concluded that they had belonged to a male.

But Dr Jantz argues that because forensic osteology - the study of bones - was still in its early stages, Dr Hoodless probably reached a wrong conclusion.

"Forensic anthropology was not well developed in the early 20th century," the paper states.

Consulting Dr Hoodless' measurements of the bones, Dr Jantz used Fordisc, a modern computer programme now widely used by forensic anthropologists, to compare them to Earhart's height and body stature.

The bones have unfortunately since been lost, and so cannot be analysed.

But the research team used historical photographs, as well as her pilots and drivers licences, to determine that her body proportions matched the skeletal remains.

A "historical seamstress" was also consulted to analyse her clothing, including "the inseam length and waist circumference of Earhart's trousers".

"This analysis reveals that Earhart is more similar to the Nikumaroro bones than 99% of individuals in a large reference sample," the report states.

The research found the remains belonged to a woman of taller-than-average European descent, as Earhart was.

"This strongly supports the conclusion that the Nikumaroro bones belonged to Amelia Earhart."

"Until definitive evidence is presented that the remains are not those of Amelia Earhart," Dr Jantz writes in the paper, "the most convincing argument is that they are hers."

Earhart was the first woman to fly across the Atlantic Ocean, and was considered one of the most famous women in the world when the mystery of her disappearance began.

She is still frequently honoured as a pioneer of women's empowerment, and was recently chosen by Mattel to be depicted as a Barbie doll.

====================================
1: 0.994188
http://www.bbc.com/news/world/us_and_canada
In pictures: Amelia Earhart
US pilot Amelia Earhart was the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic in 1932, and set a number of other aviation records.

She disappeared with her navigator, Captain Fred Noonan, in 1937 over the Pacific Ocean during an attempt to fly around the globe.

Earhart was born in Kansas in 1897. She started learning to fly some 24 years later.

A crowd cheered as she boarded her single-engine Lockheed Vega airplane in Londonderry, Northern Ireland, for a trip to London on 22 May 1932.

Earhart and Noonan first tried to fly around the would in 1924 - their plane is seen here over the Golden Gate Bridge near San Francisco. The trip had to be abandoned after the plane crashed on take-off in Hawaii.

====================================
2: 0.988493
https://www.npr.org/sections/national/
New Research Claims Bones Found 80 Years Ago On Pacific Atoll Likely Amelia Earhart's
New Research Claims Bones Found 80 Years Ago On Pacific Atoll Likely Amelia Earhart's

Enlarge this image toggle caption AP AP

There is no shortage of speculation on what became of legendary American aviator Amelia Earhart, who disappeared in 1937 over the Pacific during an attempt to circumnavigate the globe by air.

Now, Richard Jantz, a researcher affiliated with the University of Tennessee, has reexamined data from bones found three years after Earhart vanished on a remote atoll and determined they very likely belonged to her.

Three main theories about Earhart's disappearance — arguably the most enduring aviation mystery in history — have been bandied about over the years.

The first (and simplest) is that Earhart and navigator Fred Noonan, flying their Lockheed Electra 10E, simply ran out of fuel and crashed into the vast Pacific Ocean short of Howland Island, where they were expected to land.

Another theory has it that Earhart (and possibly Noonan) survived a crash landing and that at least she was taken prisoner by Japanese forces, who were expanding their reach in the region in the lead up to World War II.

Yet another one is that the Lockheed Electra crashed on or near Nikumaroro Island, about 400 miles south of Howland, probably as a result of a navigation error. Nikumaroro (then known as Gardener Island), is a tiny coral ring that is part of the current day Republic of Kirabati.

It is this last theory that the new analysis by Jantz, a professor emeritus of anthropology and director emeritus of UT's Forensic Anthropology Center, supports.

He took a closer look at data gathered in 1940 from skeletal remains recovered by a British expedition to Nikumaroro. The British found a human skull, humeri and radii (both arm bones), a tibia and fibula from the lower leg and two femurs (thigh bones). The bones were sent to Fiji, where they were examined and measured in 1941 by physician D.W. Hoodless.

History Did Amelia Earhart Survive Plane Crash? Newly Discovered Photo Offers Clues Did Amelia Earhart Survive Plane Crash? Newly Discovered Photo Offers Clues Listen · 3:45 3:45

But the bones themselves are long gone. After Hoodless examined them, and determining them to be from a stocky, European male, they disappeared. The assumption is that either he or someone else in Fiji discarded them.

Jantz, working with the International Group for Historic Aircraft Recovery (TIGHAR), which has been big into Earhart research for years, ran the measurements taken by Hoodless 80 years ago through Fordisc, "a computer program for estimating sex, ancestry, and stature from skeletal measurements," according to a statement from the University of Tennessee Knoxville.

The analysis "found that Hoodless had incorrectly determined the sex of the remains. [Fordisc], co-created by Jantz, is used by nearly every board-certified forensic anthropologist in the US and around the world."

"The data revealed that the bones have more similarity to Earhart than to 99 percent of individuals in a large reference sample," the statement said.

NPR's Christopher Joyce reported on All Things Considered back in 1998 about a similar but presumably less sophisticated analysis that determined the bones were in fact female.

"Hoodless had 13 bones to work with, including the skull and some long bones from the legs and arms," Christopher reported at the time. "His conclusion, was that the bones belonged to a European, but a European male," and that they were about 5'6" — shorter than Earhart's 5'9".

Using "scaleable objects" in photos of Earhart and examination of the inseam of some of her trousers found in archives, Jantz and another forensic analyst, Jeff Glickman, determined that Earhart was a bit shorter than that — 5'7" or 5'8". Her pilot's license also apparently lists Earhart as 5'7". In photographs of Earhart and Noonan, he stands several inches taller than her.

Enlarge this image toggle caption Topical Press Agency/Getty Images Topical Press Agency/Getty Images

To determine the height of the person whose skeletal remains were examined, Jantz compared the ratio of the humerus to the radius, which came out to 0.756. The average for a mid-20th century female was 0.73, but Earhart was a bit taller than average. From the photo analysis, Glickman says Earhart's ratio should have been 0.76.

However, that all depends on a few things: Were the measurements taken by Hoodless accurate? (And if, as we speculate, Hoodless didn't know the potential historical import of the remains, how carefully were they taken?). And how accurate was the photo analysis? Even a small variation might put the calculations off.

If we still had the bones, that might clear things up. So, why would Hoodless have thrown them out?

In 1929 the SS Norwich City, an English steamer, had wrecked off the coast of Gardner Island with the loss of 11 of the vessel's crew of 35. Hoodless might have thought he was looking at remains from that shipwreck. (Jantz says he's ruled out the remains in his analysis could be any of the shipwrecked sailors).

It might also be true that in 1940 the prevailing theory of Earhart's disappearance was probably the one where her plane ran out of fuel just short of Howland and crashed into the open ocean. In any case, that was the official explanation being offered by the U.S. government. This would seem to give further weight to the notion that Hoodless probably did not think he was looking at anything of historical import.

"When Hoodless conducted his analysis, forensic osteology was not yet a well-developed discipline," Jantz explains in the published research in the journal Forensic Anthropology. "Evaluating his methods with reference to modern data and methods suggests that they were inadequate to his task; this is particularly the case with his sexing method. Therefore his sex assessment of the Nikumaroro bones cannot be assumed to be correct."

Even so, Jantz acknowledges that a 2015 study found the techniques employed by Hoodless were "sound and therefore his sex estimate was likely correct."

====================================
3: 0.967428
http://www.bbc.com/news/world/us_and_canada
Amelia Earhart: Does photo show she died a Japanese prisoner?
Image copyright Getty Images

A newly-discovered photo suggests legendary US pilot Amelia Earhart might have died in Japanese custody - and not in a plane crash in the Pacific.

If true, it would solve one of aviation history's biggest mysteries.

Earhart vanished during a 1937 flight over the Pacific - and her disappearance has been a breeding ground for speculation ever since.

A photograph from the 1930s shows a figure that could be her, taken on the then-Japanese Marshall Islands.

However, at least one prominent expert has poured cold water on the claim, saying he was "astounded" it had taken off.

The new material - presented as evidence for an old theory - is a black-and-white photograph found in the vaults of the US National Archives.

Image copyright Courtesy of Les Kinney/US National Archives Image caption Earhart, or not? The 1930s picture shows a group of people on the wharf at Jaluit Atoll

It shows a group of people standing on a dock. The label on the photograph says it was taken on Jaluit Atoll in the Marshall Islands, presumably by a US spy.

The link might seem thin, though, to the legendary pilot who five years before her disappearance had risen to fame as the first woman to fly solo across the Atlantic.

The claim is that one seated person with her back to the camera could be Earhart, while another figure on the far left in the photo is said to be Fred Noonan, her navigator on that last flight.

On the very right of the picture is a blurry section which, it is claimed, shows Earhart's plane.

Image copyright Courtesy of Les Kinney/US National Archives Image caption These magnified details of the new picture are alleged to show (from left), navigator Fred Noonan, Earhart herself, and their plane

Ric Gillespie, author of Finding Amelia and executive director of The International Group for Historic Aircraft Recovery (TIGHAR), is certainly unconvinced.

He told the BBC: "This photograph has people convinced. I'm astounded by this. I mean, my God! Look at this photograph... Let's use our heads for a moment. It's undated. They think it's from 1937. Okay. If it's from July 1, 1937 then it can't be Amelia, because she hadn't taken off yet.

"If it's from 1935 or 1938 it can't be her.... This photograph has to have been taken within a very narrow window - within a couple of days of when she disappeared."

He notes that the photograph came from an Office of Naval Intelligence file, saying it was "very natural" the US would want a picture of this Japanese naval asset.

"And what does the photo say that it shows? ... Jaluit Atoll - Jaluit Island. It doesn't say 'Amelia Earhart in Japanese custody'!

"If this is a picture of Amelia Earhart in Japanese custody, where are the Japanese? There are no soldiers in this picture. Nobody in uniform," he observes.

Image copyright Laurie Rubin Image caption Ric Gillespie, author of Finding Amelia, does not believe the picture shows Earhart and her navigator

The photograph was released by the US-based History channel ahead of a documentary to run this weekend. If the goal was to drum up attention - and hence audience numbers - it appears to have paid off.

A preview of the programme has two experts backing up the claim by looking at the torso measurements of the woman alleged to be Amelia Earhart in the photo, and teeth and hairline of the figure claimed to be Fred Noonan.

Mystery hunters and stories

A far stretch? After all, the heroine has her back to the camera and it's debatable how much of a hairline let alone teeth can really be made out reliably on a faded photograph from the 1930s.

Mr Gillespie says it doesn't match other known pictures of the famous aviator.

"The person who they say is Amelia Earhart might be a white woman. But her hair is way too long to be Amelia's. We have many pictures of Earhart taken the day before she took off, and her hair's a lot shorter than that."

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption The fate of Amelia Earhart and Fred Noonan has long fascinated historians

He adds that the man identified as Fred Noonan does not, in his view, resemble the navigator. Further, his shirt is the wrong colour.

"The man is dressed in white. Noonan always wore dark shirts and dark slacks. Amelia didn't have a shirt like that with her on the trip either. So the Japanese have apparently given them new clothes.

"Everything about this is wrong," he concludes. "I'm astounded."

Did she crash on land?

Scepticism aside, the alleged scoop feeds into one of the existing theories about what happened to Earhart and her navigator.

She disappeared during her attempt to fly around the globe, trying to reach Howland Island in the Pacific for refuelling.

The official explanation is that she didn't find the island, lost communication and ran out of fuel, only to crash into the ocean.

While that's a largely accepted version of events, there is no evidence - as in debris - to back it up.

The two other prominent theories are that Earhart crash-landed on or near the then-Japanese Marshall Islands, or that she made it to Nikumaroro island near Kiribati and died a castaway there.

There is no conclusive evidence for either of these theories - but that hasn't stopped amateur and professional historians from digging into them.

Image copyright TIGHAR Image caption Nikumaroro island was uninhabited at the time Earhart would have landed there

Parts of a skeleton found on Nikumaroro in 1940 were initially thought to have been hers, but doctors at the time decided they belonged to a male body.

Mr Gillespie, who backs the Nikumaroro theory, has led 11 expeditions in the South Pacific to research Earhart's fate. He points out that the island was uninhabited at the time when Earhart would have landed there.

He and his team have recovered artefacts which they say strongly suggest the presence of an American woman from the right era - including a makeup box from the 1930s, a popular US women's moisturiser, and a jacket zipper.

Image copyright TIGHAR Image caption Ric Gillespie and his team excavating on Nikumaroro, where they believe Earhart's plane came down

Image copyright TIGHAR Image caption The team found a bone-handled jack knife that matches one mentioned in Earhart's inventory

Mr Gillespie also cites the timing and location of radio distress calls sent by Earhart after her plane came down. He says the calls were sent "night after night" - which would suggest the plane was on land, not in the water - because if the radios got wet, they wouldn't work.

"After six nights the radio signals stopped," he told the BBC. "We now think that's because the airplane was landed on the reef round the island, which is flat, smooth - dries at low tide... But the tide does come in and go out, and ... by the sixth night [he believes] the aeroplane was washed into the ocean by the tides.

"So when the planes from the battleship flew over the island a week later, no plane was visible."

The rest of the search took place in open ocean, and found nothing. The would-be rescuers concluded that Earhart and Noonan had sunk without a trace.

A mystery still unsolved

The conclusion drawn by the History documentary, based on the new Marshall Islands picture, is that Earhart was taken by the Japanese, later interned and eventually died a prisoner of war.

The Marshall Islands went from German to Japanese hands during World War One, and ahead of the 1941 attack on Pearl Harbor became an important military post for Tokyo.

The Japanese archives have no records of Earhart as a prisoner - but with many documents from these archives known to have been lost, this does not necessarily prove the story wrong.

At the same time, the discovery of a single photograph that may or may not show the two lost pilots is likely to add to the mystery rather than solve it.