https://www.washingtonpost.com
Inside Cal Ripken Jr.’s Baltimore County estate
1 of 13 Full Screen Autoplay Close Skip Ad × Inside Cal Ripken Jr.’s Baltimore County estate View Photos The Hall of Famer and former Orioles star plans to auction the property in May. Caption The Hall of Famer and former Orioles star plans to auction the property in May. Cal Ripken Jr.’s property in Reistertown, Md., consists of more than 24 acres of land. The main house has more than 13,000 square feet of living space and an additional 8,000 square feet are devoted to the gym, locker rooms (with soaking tub) and adjacent living space. Bob Narod Buy Photo Wait 1 second to continue.

Hall of Famer Cal Ripken Jr., after an unsuccessful attempt to sell his home on a 24-acre compound in Reisterstown, Md., plans to auction the property, according to the auction house and real estate agent Bob Lucido of Keller Williams Integrity. The complex includes a regulation-sized baseball diamond that Ripken designed.

Ripken, 57, played 21 seasons for the Baltimore Orioles and was named Most Valuable Player of the American League twice. Ripken was a 19-time All Star and holds the record for highest number of consecutive professional baseball games played. He was elected to the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 2007.

[Inside George Stephanopoulos’s Hamptons beach house]



The home has two living rooms. This one, the more casual of the two, has a wet bar. (Bob Narod)

The 13,000-square-foot home is being co-marketed by DeCaro Auctions and Lucido. After listing the home for $12.5 million in 2016, then lowering the price to $9.7 million, Ripken took the property off the market this past August, according to property records. The no-reserve auction will take place on May 12 starting at 11 a.m.

“There’s no financial difficulty,” said Lucido. “This is just a faster way of selling the property.”

The main living quarters consist of six bedrooms, 10 full bathrooms and five half baths. Attached to the main house is another 8,000-square-foot building with regulation-sized basketball court, batting cage, dance studio and large workout floor.

[A new super-fortified and booby-trapped estate near Atlanta for $14.7 million]



The space for the home gym rivals any professional gym and has great views of the back yards. Wooden beams in the ceiling add warmth to the room. (Bob Narod)

“You can walk out of the master suite and it’s like an entire gym off their bedroom,” said Lucido.

Ripken bought the property in 1984 and moved out for a year while it underwent a complete renovation in 1987. That included adding an expansive kitchen with a double stovetop, oversize fridge, large center island with second sink, and skylight to increase the natural light over the workspaces.

The first-floor master bedroom has an attached living room with working fireplace, private bathroom and two walk-in closets.

The lower level has a casual living room with attached wet bar. Also on the same level is a guest bedroom referred to as the “John Travolta Room” because Travolta spent the night there.

[Inside LeBron James’s new Los Angeles mansion]



The intimate home theater has comfortable seating, and its entrance is similar to a commercial theater with a ticket booth and counter with popcorn and candy. (Bob Narod)

An intimate home theater has comfortable seating, and its entrance is similar to a commercial theater with a ticket booth and counter with popcorn and candy. As a child, the Ripkens’ daughter, Rachel, would use the stage to practice dance routines, according to Lucido.

The baseball diamond was designed by Ripken. “Cal took great pride in maintaining the baseball field and would cut the grass a lot himself,” Lucido said. Ripken’s son, Ryan, is now a professional baseball player with the Aberdeen Ironbirds, a team owned by Ripken. Ryan Ripken’s childhood baseball teams often practiced on this baseball diamond.

A pool house has a kitchen, bathrooms and a small entertaining area, allowing owners and visitors to stay out of the sun while experiencing the outdoors.

Open houses before the May 12 auction date will take place every Saturday and Sunday from 1 to 4 p.m. starting April 14. For information about the auction, click here.