https://www.washingtonpost.com
Sex, blackmail and knights in shining armor
It’s a scandal for our times, an iconoclastic political outsider undone by allegations of homemade revenge porn. Or maybe Missouri Gov. Eric Greitens won’t be undone. Running a page from the playbook of his pal President Trump, the Republican rookie is plunging ahead, gutting it out, evidently impervious to embarrassment.

If you’ve missed this story amid the welter of news, let me catch you up. A couple of years ago, Missouri appeared to be headed to another of its customary statewide elections in which a ladder-climber from the Democratic Party would square off against a ladder-climbing Republican to succeed an incumbent known mainly for his ladder-climbing skills.

Then out of nowhere — check that, out of the digital blue — came Greitens, a political unknown who appeared to be conjured from a consultant’s wildest dreams. The young and handsome Rhodes scho­lar was a decorated Navy SEAL, a Democrat turned Republican, a champion of veterans and a scourge of crony corruption. His accomplished and beautiful wife, a Marshall scholar with a PhD from Harvard University, professes to enjoy few things more than baking cookies for their two photogenic little boys. Though Greitens was secretive about the sources of his campaign funds, he was more than happy to show off his skill with firearms and explosives, which featured prominently in his advertisements.

Greitens didn’t climb the political ladder — he blew it to smithereens. Vanquishing the career politicians, he took the oath of office in January 2017 and set about breaking dishes in the musty political clubhouse that is Jefferson City. Soon enough, the state capital was teeming with Greitens’s enemies, who come in at least two flavors: the ones who think he’s a phony with no principles, and the ones who think he’s overly sincere, at least on the topic of clean government.

Then came the tape.

It seems that Mr. Perfect had a secret in his past: an affair with his hairstylist. (I am old enough to remember when it would’ve been a scandal in the Midwest for a man to have a hairstylist at all.) And the stylist had a husband. And the now-ex-husband had a secret recording of the stylist confessing to the affair — and it was pretty hot stuff for St. Louis. “50 Shades of Greitens,” if you will.

According to the tape, the stylist told her soon-to-be-ex that Greitens invited her to his home, blindfolded her, bound her to an exercise apparatus — then snapped a photograph of her in a state of undress. She further alleged that Greitens threatened to circulate the photo if she ever revealed their relationship.

Unfortunately for the governor, this is not a problem he can shoot his way out of. He has admitted the affair. (The stylist has refused to comment.) On the topic of the photo, Greitens was ambiguous at first, but his lawyer says no picture was taken. And the governor was clear in insisting that he never made a threat. Nonetheless, the city prosecutor of St. Louis, a Democrat, persuaded a grand jury to charge the governor with felony invasion of privacy. The governor’s lawyer insists this is pure politics, but he did not help matters by basing his motion to dismiss the charge on a theory that once hanky-panky commences, expectations of privacy are moot.

Greitens no doubt wishes Republicans in Missouri would give him the kind of support the national party has been showering on the president lately. House Speaker Paul D. Ryan (Wis.) and company hardly batted an eye at news that Trump’s lawyer paid six-figure hush money to a porn star. But in the Show Me State, Greitens showed too much. Legislators from both parties have called on the governor to resign, and Monday the speaker of the GOP-dominated state House empaneled a special investigative committee — the first step toward a possible impeachment.

Voters of America, let this be a cautionary tale. Beware knights in shining armor. We’re sure to see more novice candidates with attractive résumés in upcoming elections. They will tout their outsider credentials and promise to drain various swamps. Remember the adage: If something is too good to be true, it probably isn’t true.

And contrary to what we’ve been seeing lately, successful politics continues to be a game of addition. Greitens would likely be in less trouble if he had more friends. Unsullied outsiders may picture themselves as great reformers, but in office they discover that reform requires votes, and votes flow from relationships.

Greitens stormed into Jefferson City as though he intended to be Missouri’s first president since Harry S. Truman. Now he will be lucky to survive to the end of his term. Even if he does, he’s likely to have little to show for it. “It is hard to see how he can be an effective governor or leader of the Missouri Republican Party while fighting a criminal case in court,” one GOP legislator noted concisely.

Eric, we hardly knew ye.

Read more from David Von Drehle’s archive.