https://www.washingtonpost.com
Picturing PyeongChang
The 23rd Olympic Winter Games opened as a beacon of warmth in a place of extreme cold. Nearly 3,000 athletes from 92 countries gathered in PyeongChang, South Korea, to compete in 102 event s across 15 sports. The first week of competition saw the host nation win gold in its signature sport: short-track speedskating. It saw Alpine skiing and long-track speedskating titans experience, alternatively, triumph and disappointment. And it saw the American daughter of two Korean immigrants return to her family’s country of origin and establish herself as an Olympic champion. The second week has seen feats of gold on the ice — both in dance and speed — as well as sliding, alpine and freestyle skiing, and a whole lot more. Here are the best photos from the Olympics so far.

Lizzy Yarnold of Great Britain slides to gold in the women’s skeleton, the lone gold medal thus far England. Fellow Brit Laura Deas captured bronze in the event.Photo by Sean M. Haffey/Getty Images

Norway’s Havard Lorentzen is a blur of energy as he pushes to the gold medal in the men’s 500-meter speedskating event. His time of 34.41 seconds earned him an Olympic record.Photo by PHIL NOBLE/REUTERS

Francesco Friedrich, left, and Thorsten Margis of Germany react as they watch the final run by Justin Kripps and Alexander Kopacz of Canada during the men's two-man bobsled Monday. The German and Canadian teams finished in a tie, and both teams walked away with gold.Photo by Andreas Rentz/Getty Images

Korean Yun Sung-bin slides to gold in the men’s skeleton. Photo by ARND WIEGMANN/REUTERS

Tessa Virtue and Scott Moir of Canada perform a gold-medal routine during the free dance Tuesday.Photo by LUCY NICHOLSON/REUTERS

David Morris of Australia competes during the men’s aerials qualifying Saturday. Photo by Cameron Spencer/Getty Images; A special effects camera was used for this image.

Tobias Wendl and Tobias Arlt are a blur as they slide down the track during a men’s double luge run. The German pair grabbed gold, edging an Austrian tandem by 0.017 seconds.Photo by Mohd Rasfan/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

Yuzuru Hanyu of Japan reacts after a gold-winning men’s free skate routine Saturday as stuffed animal litter the ice.Photo by Robert Cianflone/Getty Images

Following disappointment in Sochi four years ago, American Shaun White tossed all of that aside as he won his third Olympic gold medal in the men’s halfpipe.Photo by Clive Rose/Getty Images

Sweden's Frida Hansdotter captures gold in the women’s slalom on Friday.Photo by KIRILL KUDRYAVTSEV/AFP/Getty Images

Chloe Kim soared to the status of breakout American star of the Games by grabbing the snowboarding halfpipe gold. She’s a star on social media, too, which never hurts.Photo by Martin Bureau/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

Gold medalist Samuel Girard of Canada celebrates in front of silver medalist John-Henry Krueger of the United States in the men’s 1,000-meter final.Photo by DAMIR SAGOLJ/REUTERS

Mikaela Shiffrin had to wait awhile to get into the competition, but the wait was worth it: She won the giant slalom to open her Olympics with the second gold medal of her career.Photo by Alexis Boichard/Agence Zoom/Getty Images

Sarah Hoefflin of Switzerland during a training run on Saturday. Hoefflin would go on to capture gold when she dropped in for real.Photo by David Ramos/Getty Images

Hanna Huskova of Belarus in action during the women's freestyle aerials final. Huskova captured gold.Photo by SERGEI ILNITSKY/EPA-EFE/REX/Shutterstock

Matthias Mayer of Austria reacts during the victory ceremony after winning a gold medal in the men’s super-G alpine event.Photo by LEONHARD FOEGER/REUTERS

Fans watch the men’s freestyle moguls competition at Phoenix Snow Park.Photo by Cameron Spencer/Getty Images

Austrian skiing icon Marcel Hirscher, who has dominated the World Cup circuit for years, scored the first Olympic gold of his career. He prevailed in the slalom, beating France’s Alexis Pinturault by 0.23 seconds.Photo by Fabrice Coffrini/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images