https://www.washingtonpost.com
If the Wizards aren’t careful, they could slip out of the playoff race


Bradley Beal and the Wizards enter the season’s homestretch with a tough schedule and no John Wall. There is little room for error. (Jonathan Newton/The Washington Post)

After spending several days in Los Angeles for the all-star break, Bradley Beal might have been influenced by the city’s notorious traffic as he described the tight standings clogging up the Eastern Conference playoff race. Only 6 1/2 games separate the third-seeded Cleveland Cavaliers from the ninth-seeded Detroit Pistons. The Washington Wizards sit in fourth place, a mere five games ahead of Detroit, which is currently out of playoff position.

“We’re all there neck and neck,” Beal said. “Everybody’s going to continue to get better. After all-star is where it really begins. Everybody has 24, 25 games left, so they’re going to fly by.”

If his Wizards aren’t careful, they could be stuck on the wrong side of the standings come April.

Though Washington (33-24) has stayed afloat without John Wall, who underwent minor surgery on his left knee and will likely remain out until the middle of March, the team is about to undertake its most challenging stretch of the season. The Wizards have the toughest remaining schedule in the East and third hardest in the NBA, according to BasketballReference.com. These final 25 games leave no room for error.

The fourth-seeded Wizards are currently just 1 1/2 games behind the resurgent Cavaliers, whom they visit Thursday night, but less than two games ahead of three opponents: the Indiana Pacers (half-game ahead), Milwaukee Bucks (one game ahead) and Philadelphia 76ers (two games ahead). While some jostling in the middle of the pack should be expected, the Wizards — or any of the other teams, for that matter — cannot afford a significant stumble. Only 3 1/2 games separate Washington from the eighth-seeded Miami Heat, which has one of the easiest remaining schedules in the East. The seventh-ranked 76ers also have a mild road ahead and have won five straight games.

The final head-to-head matchups could determine playoff seeding, and Washington has already lost two of three to Philadelphia. The Wizards will host the surging Sixers on Sunday with a chance to tie the series. The Wizards and Heat have split a pair of games this season with two more remaining, March 6 and 10.

As Beal looked beyond the break and to the rest of the season, he seemed undaunted by the importance of these regular season matchups. Influenced by the team’s success heading into the break — winning seven of the past nine games and playing some of their best offensive basketball of the year — Beal could see the Wizards climbing in the standings.

“It’s definitely going to come down to the playoffs,” Beal said. “It’s crazy because anybody can take it. But I’m confident in myself and my teammates that we’re going to be right there at the top.”

The Wizards hobbled into the break with only one true point guard, Tomas Satoransky, and the front office has taken its time exploring possibly adding a veteran to help with depth. Wall, who was projected to miss six to eight weeks, has passed the three-week mark of his rehabilitation, though he revealed over All-Star Weekend that he has not yet began to run. He estimated that his recovery “might be longer” than even the eight-week projection, although Wall said he was unsure.

“We take advantage of it because we got a lot of guys banged up,” Beal said about the rest heading into the final stretch of the season. “We still got John out. So, we got to get as much rest and take care of our bodies as much as we can. I think [the all-star break] came at a good time, although we were definitely were on a nice, little run. We finished off well, going into All-Star [Weekend], and we’ve got to pick it up right where we left off.”

Read more:

John Wall plans to return to college this summer because he promised his dad he’d get degree

‘I’m taking on all challenges’: John Wall talks rehab, relationship with Marcin Gortat

Wizards guard Bradley Beal makes the most of his NBA All-Star Game debut

With altered format and legitimate intensity, the NBA All-Star Game gets new life

An ‘over-prepared’ Bradley Beal fizzles as Suns’ Devin Booker wins Three-Point Shootout