
Elon Musk’s surprise SXSW talk this morning was a heavy and grave affair, full of discussion around all the ways humanity may be doomed in the future: from carbon in the atmosphere, World War III, and above all, runaway artificial intelligence. We have, many times, listened to Musk warn the public about these threats. That’s why the SpaceX and Tesla CEO thinks there is such a strong need to colonize Mars and maybe the Moon — as a safety net for humanity.

But here at SXSW — a tech, culture, and marketing extravaganza where people are ostensibly excited about the future — Musk’s words provided a stark deviation from the overhyped prognostications about how tech will change the world for the better. In some ways, it also feels like Musk is only ratcheting up his rhetoric on these subjects.

“There’s likely to be another dark ages... particularly if there’s a third world war,” Musk stressed, arguing that a Mars colony would stay away from the battle on Earth and carry the torch of human culture forward. He believes that the best way to ensure these dark ages are “shortened” is by having humans on other planets come back and rebuild.

"We are building the first ship, the first mars, or interplanetary ship, right now. And I think we’ll be able to do short up and down flights in the first half of next year,” he says, echoing statements he made at the Falcon Heavy event. — Sean O'Kane (@sokane1) March 11, 2018

Musk’s ventures, electric car maker Tesla and rocket transport outfit SpaceX, are designed specifically to help stave off these dangers, and in a worst case scenario, provide humanity the tools to escape them. Yet Musk took his time in Austin to give the audience another wake-up call regarding a threat no amount of climate change measures or anti-war rhetoric can help. “Mark my words,” Musk told the crowd, “AI is far more dangerous than nukes. So why do we have no regulatory oversight?”

In some ways, Musk was revisiting his favorite talking points. Musk’s comments about AI here echo ones he’s made before as far back as 2014. He’s also reminded the public many times before that there is a very real possibility that a nuclear war could devastate the planet and that colonizing the Solar System is the only certain way to mitigate against such an extinction events.

Musk repeated comments he made last summer about government regulation of AI as well, warning today at SXSW that AI researchers are not to be as worried about the threat of machines as they should be. “The biggest issue i see with so called AI experts is they think they know more than they do. They think they’re smarter than they are,” he said. “This plagues smart people… they don’t like the idea that a machine could be smarter than them, so they discount the idea,” Musk told the crowd.

Now Nolan pivots the convo to AI. Q: “A lot of experts in AI don’t share the same fear you do.”



Musk: “Fools [laughs].” — Sean O'Kane (@sokane1) March 11, 2018

Of course, you can view Musk’s cynical comments as fear mongering that is just as shallow as your standard SXSW fluff, just on the other end of the spectrum. And Musk is known —especially in the AI research community — as someone who likes to make headlines more than get his hands dirty studying the math, philosophy, and ethics necessary to make sense of software as smart or smarter than human beings. (Musk recently stepped down from the board of AI safety nonprofit OpenAI due to avoid a conflict of interest given Tesla’s work on autonomous driving systems.)

But Musk has time and again showed that he has a firm grip on a fair number of complex subjects, from rocket science to car manufacturing to, apparently, neuroscience. “I’m very close to the cutting edge in AI and it scares the hell out of me,” Musk told the crowd. He reminded the audience in Austin that his new brain-computer interface company, Neuralink, is designed to help humans keep pace with AI by merging with software, a science fiction concept that feels far, if not impossibly so, from reality at the moment. “Neuralink is trying to help if that regard by creating a high bandwidth interface between AI and the human brain,” Musk added.

Musk’s brain-computer interface venture Neuralink wants to merge humans with AI

But it wasn’t entirely doom and gloom. Musk tossed in a few of his infamous, hard-to-gauge predictions and deadlines, saying he expects self-driving cars to be as much as 200 percent safer than a human driver by the end of next year and that in the same time frame, SpaceX would begin testing the rocket the company hopes will one day begin ferrying people to Mars. But Musk mostly seemed to be afflicted by a kind of pessimistic malaise, with his comments more negative than usual and the audience getting none of his signature blend of ironic weirdness and inspirational earnest that we’ve seen him amp up on Twitter of late.

That said, Musk was in Austin with his brother Kimball Musk seemingly to help promote Westworld and to show off a promotional video of the Falcon Heavy launch cut together by Westworld showrunner Jonathan Nolan. And also probably to drink and eat tacos and just generally goof off. To that end, Musk and and his brother, who showed up for the end of the talk, switched gears. The duo donned the show’s signature white and black cowboy hats — Musk wore the black one — for a song and dance routine that seemed equally cringeworthy and out of place. It was, as some attendees put it, quite the ride.

Elon Musk’s surprise SXSW talk this morning was a heavy and grave affair, full of discussion around all the ways humanity may be doomed in the future: from carbon in the atmosphere, World War III, and above all, runaway artificial intelligence. We have, many times, listened to Musk warn the public about these threats. That’s why the SpaceX and Tesla CEO thinks there is such a strong need to colonize Mars and maybe the Moon — as a safety net for humanity.

But here at SXSW — a tech, culture, and marketing extravaganza where people are ostensibly excited about the future — Musk’s words provided a stark deviation from the overhyped prognostications about how tech will change the world for the better. In some ways, it also feels like Musk is only ratcheting up his rhetoric on these subjects.

“There’s likely to be another dark ages... particularly if there’s a third world war,” Musk stressed, arguing that a Mars colony would stay away from the battle on Earth and carry the torch of human culture forward. He believes that the best way to ensure these dark ages are “shortened” is by having humans on other planets come back and rebuild.

"We are building the first ship, the first mars, or interplanetary ship, right now. And I think we’ll be able to do short up and down flights in the first half of next year,” he says, echoing statements he made at the Falcon Heavy event. — Sean O'Kane (@sokane1) March 11, 2018

Musk’s ventures, electric car maker Tesla and rocket transport outfit SpaceX, are designed specifically to help stave off these dangers, and in a worst case scenario, provide humanity the tools to escape them. Yet Musk took his time in Austin to give the audience another wake-up call regarding a threat no amount of climate change measures or anti-war rhetoric can help. “Mark my words,” Musk told the crowd, “AI is far more dangerous than nukes. So why do we have no regulatory oversight?”

In some ways, Musk was revisiting his favorite talking points. Musk’s comments about AI here echo ones he’s made before as far back as 2014. He’s also reminded the public many times before that there is a very real possibility that a nuclear war could devastate the planet and that colonizing the Solar System is the only certain way to mitigate against such an extinction events.

Musk repeated comments he made last summer about government regulation of AI as well, warning today at SXSW that AI researchers are not to be as worried about the threat of machines as they should be. “The biggest issue i see with so called AI experts is they think they know more than they do. They think they’re smarter than they are,” he said. “This plagues smart people… they don’t like the idea that a machine could be smarter than them, so they discount the idea,” Musk told the crowd.

Now Nolan pivots the convo to AI. Q: “A lot of experts in AI don’t share the same fear you do.”



Musk: “Fools [laughs].” — Sean O'Kane (@sokane1) March 11, 2018

Of course, you can view Musk’s cynical comments as fear mongering that is just as shallow as your standard SXSW fluff, just on the other end of the spectrum. And Musk is known —especially in the AI research community — as someone who likes to make headlines more than get his hands dirty studying the math, philosophy, and ethics necessary to make sense of software as smart or smarter than human beings. (Musk recently stepped down from the board of AI safety nonprofit OpenAI due to avoid a conflict of interest given Tesla’s work on autonomous driving systems.)

But Musk has time and again showed that he has a firm grip on a fair number of complex subjects, from rocket science to car manufacturing to, apparently, neuroscience. “I’m very close to the cutting edge in AI and it scares the hell out of me,” Musk told the crowd. He reminded the audience in Austin that his new brain-computer interface company, Neuralink, is designed to help humans keep pace with AI by merging with software, a science fiction concept that feels far, if not impossibly so, from reality at the moment. “Neuralink is trying to help if that regard by creating a high bandwidth interface between AI and the human brain,” Musk added.

Musk’s brain-computer interface venture Neuralink wants to merge humans with AI

But it wasn’t entirely doom and gloom. Musk tossed in a few of his infamous, hard-to-gauge predictions and deadlines, saying he expects self-driving cars to be as much as 200 percent safer than a human driver by the end of next year and that in the same time frame, SpaceX would begin testing the rocket the company hopes will one day begin ferrying people to Mars. But Musk mostly seemed to be afflicted by a kind of pessimistic malaise, with his comments more negative than usual and the audience getting none of his signature blend of ironic weirdness and inspirational earnest that we’ve seen him amp up on Twitter of late.

That said, Musk was in Austin with his brother Kimball Musk seemingly to help promote Westworld and to show off a promotional video of the Falcon Heavy launch cut together by Westworld showrunner Jonathan Nolan. And also probably to drink and eat tacos and just generally goof off. To that end, Musk and and his brother, who showed up for the end of the talk, switched gears. The duo donned the show’s signature white and black cowboy hats — Musk wore the black one — for a song and dance routine that seemed equally cringeworthy and out of place. It was, as some attendees put it, quite the ride.

Amy E. Price/Getty Images

We better hope that when the artificial intelligence apocalypse finally descends on us, it'll be something like "Westworld."

That's the word from show co-creator Jonathan Nolan, who spoke Saturday at the South by Southwest Conference during a panel about the hit series.

"I think we'd be lucky if this was the AI apocalypse, if it was this attractive and charming," Nolan said, noting that while folks tend to think it'll take a super AI to overthrow humans, bots are already manipulating social media users.

The implications of AI comprised just some of the discussion during the panel, which in addition to Nolan featured co-creator Lisa Joy, a cast member or two, and a rocket-fast cameo by tech-minded Renaissance man Elon Musk, founder of SpaceX, Tesla and the Boring Company.

After a preamble from Nolan on the aspirational qualities of going to space, Musk walked on stage in the last few minutes to show off a short video by Nolan and Joy. The clip focused on the recent launch of SpaceX's Falcon Heavy rocket, and on Starman, the dummy at the wheel of a Tesla SpaceX Roadster carried into space by the rocket.

"Life can't just be about solving one miserable problem after another," Musk said of space travel's power to inspire. He later tweeted that message, along with the video.

Why Falcon Heavy & Starman?



Life cannot just be about solving one sad problem after another. There need to be things that inspire you, that make you glad to wake up in the morning and be part of humanity. That is why we did it. We did for you. https://t.co/5STO7q4wro — Elon Musk (@elonmusk) March 11, 2018

Aside from Musk's brief guest-starring role, the panel included "Westworld" actors Jeffrey Wright, Evan Rachel Wood, James Marsden and Thandie Newton, as well as moderator Jason Tanz from Wired.

If you haven't seen it, HBO's "Westworld," based on the 1973 film of the same name, is a show about a theme park staffed by androids called hosts. Humans can pay to play cowboy and can get away with killing or having sex with the lifelike robots. Eventually, though, the hosts start remembering the traumatic events they've experienced and the show explores themes of ethics and artificial intelligence and just what exactly constitutes consciousness.

"Westworld" quickly attracted endless internet speculation and conspiracy theories about various plot points.

When asked about the impact of the fan base on the show, Joy said they can't really adjust the stories on the fly based on what viewers might want. Nolan followed up: "We love to fuck with Reddit."

The panel didn't reveal any major spoilers about the new season, which starts April 22, but Wood mentioned there'll be tons of action. Filming it could be grueling, she said.

Marsden said the new season will be a process of the characters creating identities for themselves, replacing the ones created for them for the purposes of the park.

"We wanted to treat ["Westworld"] a little more like a film franchise, and the only way I know to do that is to change the game every season," Nolan said.

So, about that AI apocalypse? In the past, Musk has had plenty to say about artificial intelligence, including that AI might bring about World War III. But at SXSW he stayed mum on the topic, instead adopting a far more optimistic tone as he talked about space exploration.

"To go forth and become a star-faring civilization, to be out there among the stars, to expand the scope and scale of human consciousness," Musk said, "I find that incredibly exciting. That makes me glad to be alive."

'Alexa, be more human': Inside Amazon's effort to make its voice assistant smarter, chattier and more like you.

Star Trek at 50: For 50 years, the Star Trek franchise has made history with its vision of the future.

Elon Musk issued yet another incredibly ambitious timeline.

During a Q&A at the SXSW festival on Sunday, Musk said SpaceX will be ready to fly its Mars rocket in 2019.

"We are building the first ship, or interplanetary ship, right now," Musk said. "And we'll probably be able to do short flights, short up and down flights, during the first half of next year."

Musk said last year that his Mas rocket, called BFR or Big Falcon Rocket, could one day fly people from city to city on Earth in incredibly short time spans, touting that it would take 30 minutes to hop from New York to Shanghai.

He said at the time that he hopes a BFR will land on Mars in 2022, and the first missions will send cargo. Eventually, the rocket will host convoys of people and their belongings. The ultimate goal is to establish a self-sustaining colony on the Red Planet.

Related: Elon Musk's grand plan for colonizing Mars

Sending humans to live on Mars is at the heart of Musk's vision for SpaceX. It's prompted the internet to bestow Musk with the nickname "God-Emperor of Mars."

The billionaire entrepreneur has always denied that he wants to rule the planet, and on Saturday he detailed his vision for a direct democracy in which "people vote directly on issues instead of going through representative government."

"Maybe it requires 60% [majority vote] to get a law in place, but any number over 40% can remove a law," Musk said. It should be "easier to get rid of a rule than to put one in." The text of the laws should be short and easy to understand, he added.

According to Musk, too many regulations can be harmful and keep a society from moving forward. It leads to a "hardening of the artery of the civilization," he said.

Musk also said earlier in the event that colonizing Mars will present huge "entrepreneurial opportunity."

"Mars will need everything from iron foundries to pizza joints," he said. "Mars should really have great bars...A Mars bar," he said to laughs.

The billionaire CEO of SpaceX and Tesla is known for underestimating how long his major endeavors will take. The company's Falcon Heavy rocket, which enjoyed a historic inaugural launch last month, was initially promised a 2013 debut.

Musk admitted as much about his habit of blowing through deadlines with a sarcastic comment from the SXSW stage.

"People have told me that my timelines historically have been 'optimistic,'" he said. "I'm trying to 'recalibrate' to some degree here."

CLOSE The Church of Scientology is getting its own TV network. USA TODAY

The Scientology Cross perched atop the Church of Scientology in Los Angeles. The church announced Sunday that the Scientology Network, with original programming related to the religion, will arrive Monday. (Photo: Richard Vogel/AP)

After years of being skewered by programs like Leah Remini: Scientology and the Aftermath, the controversial church with a celebrity following is taking to TV to tell its own truth.

The church announced on its official Twitter account Sunday that the Scientology Network will debut Monday (8 ET/5 PT). According to the organization, its programming will be available on DirecTV, Apple TV, Roku, Fire TV, iTunes, Google Play and the website Scientology.tv.

DirecTV representative Steven Schwadron confirmed Monday's DirecTV launch to USA TODAY.

"HELLO WORLD, and greetings from Scientology Media Productions in Hollywood, CA," read a tweet from @ScientologyTV, an account set up for the endeavor. "It's TIME for us to tell OUR story ..." The post also included a promotional video.

"The only thing more interesting than what you've heard is what you haven't," the promo promises. The ad also features an e-meter, described as "the cutting edge of spiritual technology." According to Scientology's website, the electronic instrument is used by auditors in sessions with members to check they are addressing "the correct area in order to discharge the harmful energy connected with that portion of the preclear’s reactive mind."

"It's actually making a difference in the world," a voice says offscreen in the video. "That's what it's all about."

three, two, one...HELLO WORLD, and greetings from Scientology Media Productions in Hollywood, CA!



It's TIME for us to tell OUR story...



WELCOME to the SCIENTOLOGY NETWORK countdown to launch! pic.twitter.com/PCPaaW9M7c — Scientology Network (@ScientologyTV) March 11, 2018

According to a description in the iTunes store, the Scientology Network's app will allow users to watch the original series Meet A Scientologist and Voices for Humanity. A program titled L. Ron Hubbard: In His Own Voice and Scientology Principles films will also be available, iTunes says.

In A&E's series Scientology and the Aftermath, Remini, a member of the church until 2013, speaks with other former Scientologists who make several disparaging claims about the church, including that it turns a blind eye to sexual abuse.

The church previously denied the program's claims to USA TODAY, explaining, "Nothing about A&E’s Leah Remini 'docuseries' is honest. The singular goal of the program is to make money and boost ratings by spreading salacious lies to promote A&E’s ugly brand of religious intolerance, bigotry and hatred."

The religion has also been the subject of the films My Scientology Movie andGoing Clear: Scientology and the Prison of Belief.

The Church of Scientology did not immediately return USA TODAY's request for comment about the new network.

Earlier: Leah Remini says Scientology may be behind claims against Paul Haggis

Leah Remini: 'These people's stories are important to be told'

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2paHt6W

MAKERS spotlights five women at the forefront of technologies remaking our world, from AI to robotics to telepathy to deep space exploration. They are engineers and computer scientists at the top of their game in an industry where women make up only a quarter of technical jobs. They are exploding silicon ceilings and motivating a new generation of female “makers” to join their ranks and make an impact.

Ayanna Howard, Roboticist

Dr. Ayanna Howard has had a big impact on robotics. She’s one of the few black women in the field and she’s working on inventions with an eye on social impact, not science fiction.

Mary Lou Jepsen, Inventor, Entrepreneur

If anyone can make a Vulcan mind meld come true, it’s tech inventor Mary Lou Jepsen. With every new invention, she’s moving humanity closer to unlocking the mind for both health and communications purposes.

Diana Trujillo, Aerospace Engineer

Men can have the moon. As an engineer at NASA’s Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Diana Trujillo is taking us to Mars. Trujillo’s work on the NASA Mars Curiosity Rover mission has given us our first close-up glimpses of Mars and clear evidence that the Red Planet was once capable of supporting life.

Fei-Fei Li, Professor at Stanford University & Chief Technologist at Google Cloud

Fei-Fei Li came to the U.S. from China at 16 with a love for science and she never looked back. Educated at Princeton and Caltech, her early work in robotics revolutionized machine learning and AI. Her focus on inclusion in tech careers and diversity in what we teach machines suggests that tomorrow’s robots won’t be sexist.

Limor Fried, Founder & CEO, Adafruit Industries

Electronics. Companies. Movements. Limor Fried can build anything. In fact, the MIT graduate loves sharing her ideas and the tools for creating them so much she created Adafruit Industries, a top-20 U.S. manufacturing firm and a global online community that follows her every machine-making move.

For more info, check out https://www.makers.com/techmakers.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Elon Musk says a colony on Mars is a pressing matter to ensure the survival of the human race

Elon Musk, a man prone to ludicrous deadlines, has birthed another: test flights of his Mars spaceship next year.

"I think we’ll be able to do short flights, up and down flights, some time in the first half of next year," he told an audience at the South by South West (SXSW) festival in Austin, Texas.

He said it was vital humans reached the Red Planet before the next "probable" world war.

A Mars colony, he said, would reduce the chance of an extended new Dark Ages if a nuclear conflict was to wipe out life on Earth.

But, aware of his reputation, he added: "Sometimes my timelines are a little... y’know."

Diego Donamaria/Getty

Elon Musk wants to save humanity.

That is, in part, what his quest to establish bases on the moon and Mars is about.

"There's likely to be another dark age," he told the crowd Sunday at the South By Southwest festival. Particularly if there's another World War in our future, we need to make sure "there's enough of a seed of human civilization to bring human civilization back."

While Musk was quick to say he's not exactly making a prediction, he does feel we need to get going before World War III rolls around.

This was just some of the ground Musk covered with moderator Jonathan Nolan, co-creator of HBO's "Westworld." Musk, who is the founder of multiple companies, including SpaceX, Tesla and the Boring Company, is tackling some of the biggest challenges and technological advances of the modern age, like space travel and autonomous vehicles. He made a two-day stop at SXSW to talk about his work. He also appeared on Saturday at the end of a panel with the cast and show creators of the HBO series "Westworld."

But Musk's not just thinking about doom and gloom. He's also thinking about the night life on Mars.

"Mars will need everything from iron foundries to pizza joints to nightclubs. Mars should really have great bars," he said.

Getting to that point hasn't been easy -- he said early on that SpaceX almost didn't survive. He had to borrow money from friends to keep going.

"For SpaceX, the first three launches failed. If the fourth launch had failed, we would have been dead," he said.

The big focus right now, thought, is just building the spaceship -- code named the BFR. (Read into that what you will, he said.) Musk wants to see the rocket take short flights up and down in the first half of next year.

There's also the topic of artificial intelligence. Musk's been known to express concerns that AI could bring about the next World War and Sunday's Q&A was no different.

"AI scares the hell out of me," he said, telling Nolan that while he's not typically a fan of regulation, he feels AI is more dangerous than nuclear weapons and it's not like we let just anyone build nukes.

It's important to make sure the dawn of AI is one that's symbiotic with humanity.

Whether an AI-induced third World War is what drives us off the planet, he didn't say.

But hey, the salvation of humanity might just come with Martian pizza joints.

Blockchain Decoded: CNET looks at the tech powering bitcoin -- and soon, too, a myriad services that will change your life.

'Alexa, be more human': Inside Amazon's effort to make its voice assistant smarter, chattier and more like you.

Artificial Intelligence may not be taking over the planet just yet, but it is certainly freaking people out in households around the world.

Amazon said on Wednesday it was trying to fix a bug that was causing Alexa, the AI assistant in its Echo home speakers, to laugh at random.

Some people have said the laughter happened in response to unrelated commands, while others reported it occurred unprompted.

"Lying in bed about to fall asleep when Alexa on my Amazon Echo Dot lets out a very loud and creepy laugh... there’s a good chance I get murdered tonight," one user tweeted.

There are been plenty of dire warnings about AI in recent years. Stephen Hawking, the British physicist said, and Elon...

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Elon Musk says a colony on Mars is a pressing matter to ensure the survival of the human race

Elon Musk, a man prone to ludicrous deadlines, has birthed another: test flights of his Mars spaceship next year.

"I think we’ll be able to do short flights, up and down flights, some time in the first half of next year," he told an audience at the South by South West (SXSW) festival in Austin, Texas.

He said it was vital humans reached the Red Planet before the next "probable" world war.

A Mars colony, he said, would reduce the chance of an extended new Dark Ages if a nuclear conflict was to wipe out life on Earth.

But, aware of his reputation, he added: "Sometimes my timelines are a little... y’know."

More pressing to Mr Musk, and the investors that enable him, might be the backlog of orders for the Model 3, Tesla's "affordable" new car. The company is still way behind on its production targets.

Life on Mars

But enough about reality.

Elon Musk is unquestionably the most interesting businessman in Silicon Valley - arguably the world - thanks to his almost single-handed reignition of the space race.

After a string of failed rockets - and near bankruptcy - SpaceX wowed the world with its latest flight, Falcon Heavy, in February.

A highlights reel of that event, soundtracked to David Bowie's Life on Mars, was shown to attendees at the festival.

The ultimate goal of the mission, of course, is a Mars colony. At the event, Mr Musk painted a picture of what he felt such a society would need to look like in order to be a success.

"I think most likely the form of government on Mars would be a direct democracy, where people vote directly on issues," he said.

"Everyone votes on every issue and that’s how it goes."

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption SpaceX is building the BFR rocket to enable humans to go to Mars

A Mars colony is a pressing matter, in Mr Musk's eyes, if we are to ensure the survival of the human race.

"I think it’s unlikely that we’ll never have a world war again," he said.

"This has been our pattern in the past."

On a lighter note, Mr Musk said he was excited about the potential for launching new industries from a complete fresh starting point.

Mars will need pizza joints, and one day people will drink at a Mars Bar, he said - congratulating himself on the Dad joke.

'Extremely important'

Repeating concerns he's made in the past with even more vigour, he said a bigger threat to human life was artificial intelligence - not nuclear war.

"AI is far more dangerous than nukes," he said, dismissing the pushback from AI experts who suggested Mr Musk was more interested in controversy than studying the work.

"I’m not normally an advocate of regulation and oversight," he added.

"This is a situation where you have a very serious danger to the public. There needs to be a public body that has insight and oversight so that everyone is delivering AI safely. This is extremely important.

"Nobody would suggest that we allow anyone to just build nuclear warheads if they want, that would be insane.

"My point was AI is far more dangerous than nukes. So why do we have no regulatory oversight? It’s insane."

Your view on Elon Musk will likely depend on whether you believe his wild claims about life on Mars.

The prevailing mood here, of course, is that Mr Musk is a visionary of the highest order. And if he doesn't try and get us to Mars, who will?

Correction: An earlier version of this article said the test flights would be 'to Mars'. While Mr Musk eventually intends to reach the planet, next year's tests will involve trial runs of the ship into space.

A back-and-forth between Elon Musk and President Donald Trump on Thursday highlighted the challenges automakers face when doing business in China.

After Trump jotted off a tweet about America's "massive" trade deficit with the Asian nation, Musk responded with a question: "Do you think the US & China should have equal & fair rules for cars?"

Tesla (TSLA) vehicles shipped to China face a 25% import tax while a car imported from China to the United States is only taxed about 2.5%, Musk said, "a tenfold difference."

Trump read the tweet aloud during an event on Thursday formalizing his administration's plans for a 25% tariff on steel and a 10% tariff on aluminum imports, respectively. Those tariffs are unrelated to Musk's tweets, but Trump hinted during his speech that he may one day raise taxes on imported Chinese cars.

"We just want fairness," Trump said after reading Musk's tweet. "We're going to be doing a reciprocal tax program at some point — so that if China is going to charge us 25% or if India is going to charge us 75%. ... We're going to be at those same numbers."

Musk said in another tweet earlier in the day that he is "against import duties in general, but the current rules make things very difficult. It's like competing in an Olympic race wearing lead shoes."

"We raised this with the prior administration and nothing happened. Just want a fair outcome, ideally where tariffs/rules are equally moderate. Nothing more. Hope this does not seem unreasonable," another tweet said.

We raised this with the prior administration and nothing happened. Just want a fair outcome, ideally where tariffs/rules are equally moderate. Nothing more. Hope this does not seem unreasonable. — Elon Musk (@elonmusk) March 8, 2018

China is the world's largest car market. And most major American vehicle manufacturers have jointly-owned plants in China so they can avoid steep import tariffs.

Related: These American companies could be hurt by Trump's tariffs

But Tesla does not. The company wants to open up a factory in Shanghai, but Bloomberg reported last month that Tesla still hasn't landed a deal with local authorities to get it done.

Musk made it clear in a tweet Thursday that he takes issue with China's rule against foreign car makers owning more than half of any manufacturing plant in the country.

Mary Lovely, a trade expert and senior fellow at the nonpartisan Peterson Institute, said Tesla is likely hesitant to agree to joint ownership because it "has valuable intellectual property," and China has a big interest in boosting its electric vehicle know-how.

There are several native Chinese electric car startups that hope to one day compete with Tesla.

Lovely said there's a reason why the United States and China have such drastically different tariff rates for imported cars. It goes back to when China first joined the World Trade Organization, and it hashed out a deal with the US to keep car tariffs high while slashing import taxes on other goods, such as soybeans.

"China has always seen itself as a country that needs a strong domestic automobile industry," Lovely said.

And in the past, the 2.5% tariff rate for Chinese cars imported to the US hasn't mattered much. Demand for vehicles is so high in China that the country hardly ships any vehicles abroad.

Related: 11 countries sign TPP trade pact without the United States

That, however, is changing.

Volvo (VOLAF)and General Motors (GM) both began selling Chinese-built cars in the United States in recent years. And as the Chinese market saturates, the country is poised to become a major car exporter.

That could mean it's time to renegotiate import and export tariffs, Lovely said. But she doesn't believe Trump's plan to delve into retaliatory tariffs marks the right approach.

"The fact that Trump brought this up shows that he doesn't know how trade negotiations actually happen," she said. "Just threatening has never worked with the Chinese."

Musk's twitter exchange with Trump came one week after the president announced the tariff plan, sparking fears of a trade war.

The new tariffs will initially exclude Canada and Mexico, Trump said Thursday. The duties will take effect in 15 days.

Last year, there appeared to be no love lost between Trump and Musk. The billionaire CEO quit two White House business advisory councils in protest after Trump decided to pull the US out of the Paris climate agreement.

But Trump has delivered glowing public comments about Musk in recent days, specifically about a historic rocket launch conducted by Musk's SpaceX last month. The inaugural launch of Falcon Heavy, the most powerful rocket in operation, captured the public by landing two of the rocket's side boosters after liftoff. They conducted a synchronized touchdowns back on ground pads in Florida.

Trump gushed about the spectacle to reporters on Thursday.

"To me, that was more amazing than watching the rocket go up because I've never seen that before. Nobody has seen it before, where they're saving the boosters. They came back without wings or without anything, they landed so beautifully," Trump said.

Last month, Twitter announced a number of new rules on how users and apps can automate tweets in an effort to cut down on spam and bots that spread propaganda. The company says that users using multiple accounts can “amplify or inflate the prominence of certain tweets,” and according to BuzzFeed, it has just banned a number of accounts that were known for mass-retweeting or for copying and stealing tweets from other users.

BuzzFeed says that a number of accounts — such as @dory, @girlposts, and @ginah, some with “with hundreds of thousands or even millions of followers” — violated the company’s new spam policies and have been suspended. A Twitter spokesperson pointed The Verge to new rules that the company rolled out in a broader effort to combat spam, which state that violators run the risk of having their accounts being temporarily or permanently suspended.

In February, Twitter said that it would remove the ability for third-party platforms like Tweetdeck to like, retweet, or send out identical tweets from multiple accounts to cut down on a practice known as “Tweetdecking.” At the same time that the rules were rolled out, the company cracked down on a number of bots.

The new rules come after revelations that over 50,000 accounts linked to Russian-backed organizations exposed nearly 700,000 people to propaganda over the course of the 2016 US Presidential Election in January. At the time, the company said that it would be working to prevent applications from controlling armies of bots. The limits are designed to prevent individuals from posting “substantially similar content” across multiple accounts, and using those accounts to artificially boost their visibility and popularity.

Last month, Twitter announced a number of new rules on how users and apps can automate tweets in an effort to cut down on spam and bots that spread propaganda. The company says that users using multiple accounts can “amplify or inflate the prominence of certain tweets,” and according to BuzzFeed, it has just banned a number of accounts that were known for mass-retweeting or for copying and stealing tweets from other users.

BuzzFeed says that a number of accounts — such as @dory, @girlposts, and @ginah, some with “with hundreds of thousands or even millions of followers” — violated the company’s new spam policies and have been suspended. A Twitter spokesperson pointed The Verge to new rules that the company rolled out in a broader effort to combat spam, which state that violators run the risk of having their accounts being temporarily or permanently suspended.

In February, Twitter said that it would remove the ability for third-party platforms like Tweetdeck to like, retweet, or send out identical tweets from multiple accounts to cut down on a practice known as “Tweetdecking.” At the same time that the rules were rolled out, the company cracked down on a number of bots.

The new rules come after revelations that over 50,000 accounts linked to Russian-backed organizations exposed nearly 700,000 people to propaganda over the course of the 2016 US Presidential Election in January. At the time, the company said that it would be working to prevent applications from controlling armies of bots. The limits are designed to prevent individuals from posting “substantially similar content” across multiple accounts, and using those accounts to artificially boost their visibility and popularity.

Reading the tech press, you would be forgiven for believing that AI is going to eat pretty much every industry and job. Not a day goes by without another reporter breathlessly reporting some new machine learning product that is going to trounce human intelligence. That surfeit of enthusiasm doesn’t originate just with journalists though — they are merely channeling the wild optimism of researchers and startup founders alike.

There has been an explosion of interest in artificial intelligence and machine learning over the past few years, as the hype around deep learning and other techniques has increased. Tens of thousands of research papers in AI are published yearly, and AngelList’s startup directory for AI companies includes more than four thousands startups.

After being battered by story after story of AI’s coming domination — the singularity, if you will — it shouldn’t be surprising that 58% of Americans today are worried about losing their jobs to “new technology” like automation and artificial intelligence according to a newly released Northeastern University / Gallup poll. That fear outranks immigration and outsourcing by a large factor.

The truth though is much more complicated. Experts are increasingly recognizing that the “accuracy” of artificial intelligence is overstated. Furthermore, the accuracy numbers reported in the popular press are often misleading, and a more nuanced evaluation of the data would show that many AI applications have much more limited capabilities than we have been led to believe. Humans may indeed end up losing their jobs to AI, but there is a much longer road to go.

Another replication crisis

For the past decade or so, there has been a boiling controversy in research circles over what has been dubbed the “replication crisis” — the inability of researchers to duplicate the results of key papers in fields as diverse as psychology and oncology. Some studies have even put the number of failed replications at more than half of all papers.

The causes for this crisis are numerous. Researchers face a “publish or perish” situation where they need positive results in order to continue their work. Journals want splashy results to get more readers, and “p-hacking” has allowed researchers to get better results by massaging statistics in their favor.

Artificial intelligence research is not immune to such structural factors, and in fact, may even be worse given the incredible surge of excitement around AI, which has pushed researchers to find the most novel advances and share them as quickly and as widely as possible.

Now, there are growing concerns that the most important results in AI research are hard if not impossible to replicate. One challenge is that many AI papers are missing the key data required to run their underlying algorithms or worse, don’t even include the source code for the algorithm under study. The training data used in machine learning is a huge part of the success of an algorithm’s results, so without that data, it is nearly impossible to determine whether a particular algorithm is functioning as described.

Worse, in the rush to publish novel and new results, there has been less focus on replicating studies to show how repeatable different results are. From the MIT Technology Review article linked above, “…Peter Henderson, a computer scientist at McGill University in Montreal, showed that the performance of AIs designed to learn by trial and error is highly sensitive not only to the exact code used, but also to the random numbers generated to kick off training, and to ‘hyperparameters’—settings that are not core to the algorithm but that affect how quickly it learns.” Very small changes could lead to vastly different results.

Much as a single study in nutrition science should always be taken with a grain of salt (or perhaps butter now, or was it sugar?), new AI papers and services should be treated with a similar level of skepticism. A single paper or service demonstrating a singular result does not prove accuracy. Often, it means that a very choice dataset operating with very specific conditions can lead to a high point of accuracy that won’t apply to a more general set of inputs.

Accurately reporting accuracy

There is a palpable excitement about the potential of AI to solve problems as diverse as clinical evaluation at a hospital to document scanning to terrorism prevention. That excitement though has clouded the ability of journalists and even researchers from accurately reporting accuracy.

Take this recent article about using AI to detect colorectal cancer. The article says that “The results were impressive — an accuracy of 86 percent — as the numbers were obtained by assessing patients whose colorectal polyp pathology was already diagnosed.” The article also included the key results paragraph from the original study.

Or take this article about Google’s machine learning service to perform language translation. “In some cases, Google says its GNMT system is even approaching human-level translation accuracy. That near-parity is restricted to transitions between related languages, like from English to Spanish and French.”

These are randomly chosen articles, but there are hundreds of others that breathlessly report the latest AI advances and throw out either a single accuracy number, or a metaphor such as “human-level.” If only evaluating AI programs were so simple!

Let’s say you want to determine whether a mole on a person’s skin is cancerous. This is what is known as a binary classification problem — the goal is to separate out patients into two groups: people who have cancer, and people who do not. A perfect algorithm with perfect accuracy would identify every person with cancer as having cancer, and would identify every person with no cancer as not having cancer. In other words, the results would have no false positives or false negatives.

That’s simple enough, but the challenge is that conditions like cancer are essentially impossible to identify with perfect accuracy for computers and humans alike. Every medical diagnostic test usually has to make a tradeoff between how sensitive it is (how many positives does it identify correctly) versus how specific it is (how many negatives does it identify correctly). Given the danger of misidentifying a cancer patient (which could lead to death), tests are generally designed to ensure a high sensitivity by decreasing specificity (i.e. increasing false positives to ensure that as many positives are identified).

Product designers have choices here in how they want to balance those competing priorities. The same algorithm might be implemented differently depending on the the cost of false positives and negatives. If a research article or service doesn’t discuss these tradeoffs, then accuracy is not being fairly represented.

Even more importantly, the singular value of accuracy is a bit of a misnomer. Accuracy reflects how many positive patients were identified positively and how many negative patients were identified negatively. But we can maintain the same accuracy by increasing one number and decreasing the other number or vice versa. In other words, a test could emphasize detecting positive patients well, or it could emphasize excluding negative patients from the results, while maintaining the same accuracy. Those are very different end goals, and some algorithms may be better tuned toward one rather than the other.

That’s the complication of using a single number. Metaphors are even worse. “Human-level” doesn’t say anything — there is rarely good data on the error rate of humans, and even when there is such data, it is often hard to compare the types of errors made by humans versus those made by machine learning.

That’s just some of the complications for the simplest classification problem. All of the nuances around evaluating AI quality would take at least a book, and indeed, some researchers will no doubt spend their entire lives evaluating these systems.

Everyone can’t get a PhD in artificial intelligence, but the onus is on each of us as consumers of these new technologies to apply a critical eye to these sunny claims and rigorously evaluate them. Whether it is reproducibility or breathless accuracy claims, it is important to remember that many of the AI techniques we rely on are mere technological babies, and still need a lot more time to mature.

Featured Image: Zhang Peng/LightRocket/Getty Images

Oculus Rift users around the world have been unable to use their devices as part of a global software bug affecting nearly all of the virtual reality headsets.

Users began reporting connection problems yesterday, with most Oculus headsets affected by the problem.

When users attempted to run the Oculus headset, which requires a PC connection through the Oculus App, they are met with the message: "Can't reach Oculus runtime service".

Some were left without power for more than 15 hours on Wednesday, but the Facebook-owned virtual reality company acknowledged the problem on Wednesday, which Oculus co-founder Nate Mitchell said had finally been fixed early Thursday morning.

"Rift is back online as of 12am [Pacific Time]. This was a mistake on our end, and we apologize," Mitchell said on Twitter.

In 1976, The New Yorker published a cover illustration by Saul Steinberg called "View of the World from 9th Avenue." The cover was meant to parody the self-obsession of Manhattanites. The island's west side occupies half of the illustration. In the distance are a smattering of indistinguishable American cities and states. Los Angeles is barely visible; San Francisco and Seattle aren't on the map. Beyond is the vast Pacific, with Asia on the horizon.

More than four decades later, the American news media still has that worldview. Nearly all the top news organizations are based in New York or Washington. They do cover the world -- including Silicon Valley and Hollywood -- but they prioritize the stories happening on their doorsteps.

Sign up for PACIFIC and get daily updates on the stories you need to know

But one of the most important stories in the world today isn't happening in Washington or on Wall Street. It's happening on the Pacific Coast.

From Seattle to Silicon Valley to Hollywood, the Pacific is the global capital of change and innovation, and the vanguard of a creative and technological revolution. It also happens to be the world's fifth-biggest economy, and home to its five biggest companies by market value. Decisions being made today by the likes of Jeff Bezos, Elon Musk and other people on the U.S.' West Coast will play a major role in shaping society for decades to come. And on the other Pacific Coast, companies in China, Japan and elsewhere are charting a course for the future that will have global impact of its own.

The Innovation Economy deserves robust media coverage. It deserves a news source that distills the day-to-day developments in technology and media and provides an understanding of the big picture. It deserves a great morning newsletter that puts the tech and media power players at the center of the action. Wall Street has DealBook. Washington has Playbook. It's about time the West Coast had PACIFIC.

PACIFIC is the newsletter for the Innovation Economy. It puts the power players in tech and media at the center of the action, and covers their moves and their interests, because those moves and interests signal where society is headed. It treats Seattle, San Francisco and Los Angeles not as cities on the periphery, but as capitals of the 21st Century. It works on Pacific Standard Time.

If Saul Steinberg were alive today, we'd commission a new view of the world. There in the foreground are South Lake Union, Sand Hill Road and Sunset Boulevard. Asia is on the immediate horizon, very near and growing closer. And in the far distance, circling all the way back to New York and Washington, the rest of the world, waiting to be changed.

Sign up for PACIFIC and get daily updates on the stories you need to know

One dad brought the magic and wonder of Disneyland right into his daughter's bedroom. Lyle Coram of Nevada says every time he brings 7-year-old Shelby to the theme park she is mesmerized watching the fireworks light up the night sky over the castle. He was able to re-create the scene on the ceiling of his little girl's playroom using fiber optics and a projector. InsideEdition.com's Mara Montalbano (https://twitter.com/MaraMontalbano) has more.

READ MORE SEE LESS

Warner Bros.

In about 30 seconds, a crowd of IOI Sixers, armed enemies from the Ernest Cline novel "Ready Player One," are going to come charging and shooting at me and two compatriots. We have guns, but I've been told this army is basically invincible and if I get cornered, it's best to teleport away and keep shooting.

I wouldn't describe this as my ideal situation.

But hey, I'm at South by Southwest wearing a wireless HTC Vive headset with some serious firepower in each of my virtual hands. This is no time to cower in a demo room, especially with people watching.

So, after sort of waving to one another, the other two players and I get cracking, taking out as many Sixers as possible, collecting coins along the way. I land a couple of head shots, some long shots, and try not to do the thing I do when I get to play in virtual reality: unleash a string of obscenities that would make my mother blush.

"Rise of the Gunters" is just one of eight virtual reality experiences that HTC Vive, in partnership with Warner Bros., has announced in advance of the upcoming film adaptation of "Ready Player One."

Drifter Entertainment

While the dawn of promotional VR experiences might strike some as fun but ultimately unnecessary, using VR to promote a movie about VR is not just a meta move.

"With this being a VR film, a lot of people are going to learn about VR," HTC Vive's senior manager for product marketing, J.B. McRee, tells me.

They might just want to try it for themselves, and VR still has an awareness campaign to wage.

For the unfamiliar, "Ready Player One" takes place in 2045 when real life isn't so great but there exists a virtual world called the OASIS that's a whole lot better. Folks like main character Wade Watts spend most of their time in the OASIS, even attending school there as avatars of themselves. But when creator of the world James Halliday dies, there's a Willy Wonka-esque hunt through challenges steeped in classic video games and '80s pop culture. The stakes are control of OASIS as well as Halliday's money.

The movie adaptation, directed by Steven Spielberg, comes out March 29, but the novel, which appeared in 2011, has held near-holy book status for the virtual reality community, which hopes to one day create a VR world: the metaverse.

At SXSW, "Ready Player One" has taken over event space Brazos Hall. If you're not messing about in VR, you can wander around a giant room soaked in the pop culture references the book so celebrates; there's a wall of cassette tapes, a DeLorean and the top half of the Iron Giant.

Erin Carson/CNET

The VR experiences I try on the above floor, powered by the Vive Pro, are directly inspired by the book but also riff off of '80s video games. Fracture, for example, plays off the fictional Halliday's favorite '80s arcade titles. With one hand, I grasp a ball and with the other, hit it at ginormous translucent cubes to get points.

Another experience, called Smash, places me in something of a neon-lit tunnel where I beat back orbs before they can get past my head.

I'm all over the place, arms flailing. With one overzealous swing, I step past the Vive's digital boundaries, called the Chaperone, and smack the controller into the wall. The woman running the demo tells me it happens all the time.

There's also a more low-key affair called the Distracted Globe Music Experience in TheWave VR, inspired by the zero-gravity dance club in the book. It's all dim lighting and bright neon. "Everybody Wants to Rule the World" by Tears for Fears plays in the background.

Much like in the book, I can fly around the club. I can even summon a dance floor of light-up squares to appear beneath my nonexistent feet. It's nice to get a break from shooting bad guys.

McRee tells me the experiences come from different developers Vive's worked with in the past. They'll soon be available through Steam and Viveport and in certain VR arcades around the country.

In Rise of the Gunters, we complete our mission in an ominous, glowing, golden atmosphere, which is more than I can say for myself when playing Gauntlet. In Gauntlet I carefully make my way through a dungeon, picking up gold coins, ready to shoot shuffling zombies with a bow and arrow. Finally, there are too many. They're getting in my space and I mutter something like, "Oh god, no thank you" as they finally finish me off.

We might not have the metaverse yet, but we've got floating dance clubs and teleportation. And mercifully, the Sixers and zombies stay in your headset.

Virtual reality 101: CNET tells you everything you need to know about VR.

Tech Culture: From film and television to social media and games, here's your place for the lighter side of tech.

CLOSE SportsPulse: Trysta Krick runs through surprises, snubs and other highlights from Selection Sunday as March Madness officially begins. USA TODAY Sports

Joel Berry II will help lead the Tar Heels as they try to defend their 2017 national championship. (Photo: Brad Penner, USA TODAY Sports)

Virginia and Villanova were tapped as favorites by one large Nevada sportsbook, minutes after the brackets for March Madness were released Sunday.

William Hill, which runs more than 100 sportsbooks in Nevada, pegged those two No. 1 seeds at 6-to-1 to win it all. Kansas and Xavier – the other two No. 1 seeds – were 10-to-1 and 12-to-1, respectively.

Virginia also has the biggest point spread (22 points) among the 32 first-round games. On Friday, the Cavaliers face the Maryland-Baltimore County Retrievers, who secured a berth with a Jairus Lyles 23-foot last-second shot to win the America East title over the weekend.

More: NCAA tournament bracket: Selection committee gave credit for November wins

More: Middle Tennessee, Notre Dame among the 7 biggest NCAA tournament snubs on Selection Sunday

More: NCAA tournament 2018 underseeded and overseeded teams: 5 pairings the committee got wrong

Maryland-Baltimore County, Cal State Fullerton, Texas Southern, Radford, LIU-Brooklyn and North Carolina Central are the longshots, each with 2500-to-1 odds to claim the title. 2017 champion North Carolina is listed at 15-to-1 odds to repeat.

Michigan State, which is at 10-to-1, has seen the most money bet on it among all the teams since last year's Final Four concluded with 11% of the future bets placed on the Spartans at William Hill. Ten percent of the future bets during that span have been placed on Duke, which is at 8-to-1 to win a sixth title.

Follow Perez on Twitter @byajperez

Every year at SXSW in Austin, TX, Sony shows off a bunch of experimental projects. This year, the company introduced its Superception Head Light system, which is basically a helmet with a Sony MP-CL1 projector sticking out the front and attached Sony MDR-XB950 headphones on the side. Someone at Sony just strapped a bunch of devices together and attached a HTC Vive tracker to the back so that wearers can move around the room while the projection follows their movements.

Sony says the device is supposed to demonstrate how technology can affect human perception through our various senses. This demo attempts to teach wearers about how animals use their senses to get around the world — like how mosquitos use smell to find blood. The headphones played buzzing sounds while the projector attempted to show what the world would look like to a mosquito, with its smell alerts occasionally going off. It didn’t make much sense. Another demo showed the world through the eyes of a butterfly as the projector broadcasted a colorful, abstract mosaic onto the walls. I didn’t understand what I was supposed to take away from the experience, though I imagine it would have been more fun on drugs.

However! I will say thank you to Sony because I love Frankenstein gadgets like this one, even if the ultimate use case isn’t clear. You can walk around your house and play Netflix everywhere you go? Sony’s projector helmet is ultimately a technology in search of a problem. But plenty of gadgets would benefit from being a little more weird.

Every year at SXSW in Austin, TX, Sony shows off a bunch of experimental projects. This year, the company introduced its Superception Head Light system, which is basically a helmet with a Sony MP-CL1 projector sticking out the front and attached Sony MDR-XB950 headphones on the side. Someone at Sony just strapped a bunch of devices together and attached a HTC Vive tracker to the back so that wearers can move around the room while the projection follows their movements.

Sony says the device is supposed to demonstrate how technology can affect human perception through our various senses. This demo attempts to teach wearers about how animals use their senses to get around the world — like how mosquitos use smell to find blood. The headphones played buzzing sounds while the projector attempted to show what the world would look like to a mosquito, with its smell alerts occasionally going off. It didn’t make much sense. Another demo showed the world through the eyes of a butterfly as the projector broadcasted a colorful, abstract mosaic onto the walls. I didn’t understand what I was supposed to take away from the experience, though I imagine it would have been more fun on drugs.

However! I will say thank you to Sony because I love Frankenstein gadgets like this one, even if the ultimate use case isn’t clear. You can walk around your house and play Netflix everywhere you go? Sony’s projector helmet is ultimately a technology in search of a problem. But plenty of gadgets would benefit from being a little more weird.

Amazon said it was working to fix an issue with its Alexa-enabled devices causing them to spontaneously burst into laughter.

Amazon confirmed that it was aware of the problem on Wednesday night, in news first reported by The Verge, though did not provide further details of what was causing it or how long it would take to fix.

Its voice assistant Alexa is activated on Echo smart speakers through voice commands.

Users have been posting about the issue on social media for the past two days, with one claiming he asked Alexa to turn off the lights, but instead heard a woman laugh.

"Alexa but please don’t try to kill me in my sleep," another user said in a post on Twitter, after her Echo device began laughing unprompted.

HAL-9000, the malevolent supercomputer at the heart of Stanley Kubrick’s classic 2001: A Space Odyssey, is an icon of science fiction cinema. So much so, that if you ask any one of the virtual assistants to “Open the pod bay doors,” they’ll dutifully parrot HAL’s lines from the movie back at you. Now, Master Replicas Group wants to take that step a bit further, turning HAL into a virtual assistant that can control your home.

The company name might be familiar to prop and costume fans: the original Master Replicas produced a range of high-quality props from franchises like Star Wars and Star Trek before going out of business a decade ago. If you’ve seen someone swinging around a lightsaber, there’s a good chance it’s one of Master Replicas’ props, or based off of their models. The new company is made up of several former employees, who are getting back into the prop replica business with a new range of products, including an interactive replica of HAL.

This isn’t the first time that someone’s thought about putting HAL into your home’s smart devices: a couple of years ago, fan prop-maker GoldenArmor made its own version that allows someone to mount it over their Nest thermostat. MRG’s prop goes a bit beyond that. It recently obtained the license from Warner Bros. to create an exact replica of the iconic computer, and while most prop replicas are static recreations of a movie or film prop, this version is designed to be interactive, using Amazon’s smart assistant, Alexa.

MRG CEO Steve Dymszo told The Verge that he made his own replicas of HAL’s panel under a earlier company, Artifactory, and had reached out to Warner Bros. to try and get a license for the product. Initially, the studio wasn’t interested, but with the 50th anniversary of the film this year, they granted the company the rights to produce their own line of replica props from the film.

One of those replicas is an interactive version of HAL. The company says that the computer will use Amazon’s Echo technology to control your home, using a Fire HD tablet as its base, along with additional lights, microphones, speakers, and its own software that the company has installed.

Dymszo explains that MRG initially merged two projects: a static prop and an interactive computer, which was planned to run off of a Raspberry Pi with an LCD screen, only to realize that they could accomplish the same task with a Fire HD tablet.

In a short demonstration video, a user asks the question, getting a response in HAL’s voice, before switching over to Alexa for the weather. The device includes the Fire HD tablet to replicate some of the interfaces from the film, and to display information from Alexa. Currently, the device is only loaded with lines from the film, which are triggered with Alexa’s wake words, but Dymszo says that the goal is to have the device work entirely with HAL’s voice, and that they are working to get Amazon’s approval to do so. “It’s the first prop replica that can be updated,” Dymszo notes, saying that they intend for the device to work less like a tablet, and more like an object from the film. But, it’ll act just like your virtual assistant, fetching you the news or weather, and controlling any smart devices you might have installed in your home.

The company will begin taking preorders for the device in April, and plans to begin shipping in August or September. Dymszo says that the company will launch a separate Kickstarter in April for a special, numbered series of the props — 1 through 2001, with special tiers for 1, 1968, and 2001. He says that they’ve already begun production for the devices.

The HAL computer isn’t the only project in the pipeline: the company already sells a glorified screen saver that loops through a series of computer displays from the film, and will be releasing a mini-HAL keychain flash drive that lights up when plugged in. The company also has a license with the Smithsonian, and releases a range of art products, like posters and replica Lunar and Martian features.

Dymszo hopes that the product will appeal beyond just the prop replica community, while staying true to those roots. “It’s a replica that acts as your assistant,” he said.

HAL-9000, the malevolent supercomputer at the heart of Stanley Kubrick’s classic 2001: A Space Odyssey, is an icon of science fiction cinema. So much so, that if you ask any one of the virtual assistants to “Open the pod bay doors,” they’ll dutifully parrot HAL’s lines from the movie back at you. Now, Master Replicas Group wants to take that step a bit further, turning HAL into a virtual assistant that can control your home.

The company name might be familiar to prop and costume fans: the original Master Replicas produced a range of high-quality props from franchises like Star Wars and Star Trek before going out of business a decade ago. If you’ve seen someone swinging around a lightsaber, there’s a good chance it’s one of Master Replicas’ props, or based off of their models. The new company is made up of several former employees, who are getting back into the prop replica business with a new range of products, including an interactive replica of HAL.

This isn’t the first time that someone’s thought about putting HAL into your home’s smart devices: a couple of years ago, fan prop-maker GoldenArmor made its own version that allows someone to mount it over their Nest thermostat. MRG’s prop goes a bit beyond that. It recently obtained the license from Warner Bros. to create an exact replica of the iconic computer, and while most prop replicas are static recreations of a movie or film prop, this version is designed to be interactive, using Amazon’s smart assistant, Alexa.

MRG CEO Steve Dymszo told The Verge that he made his own replicas of HAL’s panel under a earlier company, Artifactory, and had reached out to Warner Bros. to try and get a license for the product. Initially, the studio wasn’t interested, but with the 50th anniversary of the film this year, they granted the company the rights to produce their own line of replica props from the film.

One of those replicas is an interactive version of HAL. The company says that the computer will use Amazon’s Echo technology to control your home, using a Fire HD tablet as its base, along with additional lights, microphones, speakers, and its own software that the company has installed.

Dymszo explains that MRG initially merged two projects: a static prop and an interactive computer, which was planned to run off of a Raspberry Pi with an LCD screen, only to realize that they could accomplish the same task with a Fire HD tablet.

In a short demonstration video, a user asks the question, getting a response in HAL’s voice, before switching over to Alexa for the weather. The device includes the Fire HD tablet to replicate some of the interfaces from the film, and to display information from Alexa. Currently, the device is only loaded with lines from the film, which are triggered with Alexa’s wake words, but Dymszo says that the goal is to have the device work entirely with HAL’s voice, and that they are working to get Amazon’s approval to do so. “It’s the first prop replica that can be updated,” Dymszo notes, saying that they intend for the device to work less like a tablet, and more like an object from the film. But, it’ll act just like your virtual assistant, fetching you the news or weather, and controlling any smart devices you might have installed in your home.

The company will begin taking preorders for the device in April, and plans to begin shipping in August or September. Dymszo says that the company will launch a separate Kickstarter in April for a special, numbered series of the props — 1 through 2001, with special tiers for 1, 1968, and 2001. He says that they’ve already begun production for the devices.

The HAL computer isn’t the only project in the pipeline: the company already sells a glorified screen saver that loops through a series of computer displays from the film, and will be releasing a mini-HAL keychain flash drive that lights up when plugged in. The company also has a license with the Smithsonian, and releases a range of art products, like posters and replica Lunar and Martian features.

Dymszo hopes that the product will appeal beyond just the prop replica community, while staying true to those roots. “It’s a replica that acts as your assistant,” he said.

Sheldon County is a podcast that will never sound the same twice. Every time someone listens to it, they’ll begin by typing a random number into a website. This “seed” will set in motion a Rube Goldberg machine of calculation that will create characters, relationships, jealousies, betrayals, and maybe even a murder or two. These plot points will be turned into a text narrative, read aloud by a voice synthesizer, and then zipped up into an audio file. Each time it will be a unique version of Sheldon County’s story. A podcast made just for you.

That’s the dream anyway — the current execution still needs work. So far, only a few episodes of this procedurally generated podcast exist (you can listen to two below), and its creator, PhD student James Ryan, is still working on a website. He says the back-end software is mostly finished, but a few finishing touches are needed, like creating a program to automatically add the music to each episode. “Right now I’m proving the concept,” he tells The Verge. “And then I’ve got a dissertation to start.”

In other words, it might be a while.

But what’s been created so far is impressive, and feels like a little preview of the future. One where entertainment content is not just ubiquitous (god knows the world has enough podcasts) but also unique. As a way of making fun things for humans, procedurally generated content is not new, but it has become more complex in recent years. See, for example, video games with generative elements like No Man’s Sky, which created unique planets for each player to explore; and Middle-earth: Shadow of War, which made enemies with elaborate histories that fascinated players as much as the game’s story.

Sheldon County seems basic by comparison, but that’s only because its output is audio. The actual mechanisms that create the characters and their interactions are much more complex. “It’s very much research, pushing the boundaries of technology,” Mark Riedl, an associate professor at Georgia Tech’s Entertainment Intelligence Lab, tells The Verge.

For Ryan, Sheldon County is the latest step in a life-long quest to build computers that generate fictional worlds. He’s a linguist turned programmer, whose work with the Expressive Intelligence Studio at the University of California, Santa Cruz is dedicated to finding new ways to use machines expressively.

“When I learned to code, one of the first programs I ever made was a name generator,” he says. “It would pick two names from a list of thousands and combine them together. And to me, just creating this name felt like creating a whole character. A tiny abstract person.”

From this simple start, Ryan made ever more complex world-generators. Sheldon County itself is built on a program of his called Hennepin, which creates characters, their social networks, and the world they live in. Ryan compares Hennepin to “the biggest Excel spreadsheet in the world,” with endless rows of cells that correspond to characters, traits, relationships, professions, and so on.

‘Sheldon County’ is created by “the biggest spreadsheet in the world”

There’s no visualization or textual output — just data. But when a user enters their random number seed, this spreadsheet is populated anew, creating a unique world. The program then models how these data points interact by simulating a daily cycle in which each character has a chance to perform an action. The actions are in turn dictated by an individual’s traits and relationships. “A character cannot take the action to ‘ridicule’ another character unless they have the trait ‘cool’ and their target is someone they don’t like,” says Ryan.

Combine enough of these data points and you soon end up with something very complex, says Ryan, and it helps that the program doesn’t just simulate each version of Sheldon County for days or weeks. It simulates centuries. “This produces a huge, huge amount of action, and from this, we can take the most interesting sequences,” says Ryan.

He gives the example of an early project which used similar software to simulate social life in a small town. “In that game, we were always finding ridiculously emergent storylines,” he says. “In one version, there was this 17-year-old guy whose mom had the favorite diner in town, but then he decides to start his own diner that becomes more popular than hers! I’d coded in how business rivalries might work, but I’d never expected it to become a family affair.”

You can imagine that plot making a good episode of This American Life.

In many ways, this type of procedural generation is nothing new. It goes back to the 1980s and earlier, says Riedl, where similar techniques were used to generate maps for video games. “It was initially because computers at the time didn’t have much storage, so you couldn’t ship gigantic games,” he explains. “That meant it was incumbent on early titles, like Rogue, NetHack, and so on, to generate mazes on CPUs using some very fast and cheap algorithms.”

The usefulness of these algorithms receded as storage became cheaper, but the procedural approach to generating content has become mainstream again as excitement about artificial intelligence has boomed.

What’s interesting, though, is that modern AI techniques like deep neural networks aren’t actually that well-suited for projects like Sheldon County. Ryan says he mainly uses what’s sometimes called symbolic AI or, pejoratively, “good old-fashioned AI.” This approach is less about mining data to look for patterns, as with deep learning, and more about creating sets of rules and logical instructions that guide a process.

There are some simple reasons modern AI don’t work for tasks like this, says Riedl. It’s partly that techniques like deep learning still aren’t good at generating coherent text (even the most advanced chatbots today rely on preprogrammed phrases). And also because older techniques give programmers more control over the output.

Even with these limitations, there’s still lots you can do of course. “One of the most interesting recent examples was MIT’s horror story generator, which was interactive,” says Riedl. “So you would write a line, then it writes a line; you write a line, it writes a line. Really, it becomes this kind of creative writing prompting exercise, which allows you to interpret what the program produces.”

Using AI creatively means creating new types of entertainment

Riedl’s own work explores how modern AI techniques can take on the challenges of storytelling. “I would like to be the person that solves some of these questions of making story generation work better for longer stories,” he says. But, he suggests that in the near future, AI won’t really be able to generate new content for us, whether it’s TV shows or podcasts. Instead, it’ll be a creator’s job to make new types of entertainment.

Alex Champandard, an AI programmer and co-founder of the startup Creative.AI, has a similar take. He says fully automated entertainment is not the way forward and notes that many creative projects people claim to be the product of AI rely on substantial human insight and oversight. “There is no machine that has been creative on its own. It’s ultimately because of the human input,” Champandard tells The Verge.

He suggests Ryan’s project is interesting not necessarily because of the narratives it creates, but because it questions our idea of what a podcast is and what makes one good in the first place. “In the future, I’m sure we’ll have podcasts that are generated by machines that no one listens to, and they’ll disappear because it won’t be worth the electricity,” says Champandard. “But these experiments are all part of what makes this space fun.”

For Ryan, it certainly seems that the sense of experimentation and creation is central to his project. “As far as the future goes, I certainly hope that generative media becomes more mainstream,” he says, but notes that his own sense of enjoyment comes not from consuming generative media, but creating it. “The most rewarding thing about working with these simulations is seeing these wild emergences,” he says, which is similar to Riedl’s point about the MIT horror story generator. It’s only fun because the audience participates.

Perhaps that’s where the future of generative media lies, then. Not in creating infinite podcasts tailored to each individual, but in turning us all into storytellers who get to create and enjoy our own narratives.
