


CLOSE SportsPulse: Trysta Krick runs through surprises, snubs and other highlights from Selection Sunday as March Madness officially begins. USA TODAY Sports

Charles Barkley's analysis and jokes with fellow TBS analysts were a bright spot in an otherwise heavily-criticized show. (Photo: Christopher Hanewinckel, USA TODAY Sports)

The tweaks to Sunday’s NCAA March Madness Selection Show were announced last week, but they were either a shock or just not well received by many viewers.

Harold Bryant, executive producer and senior vice president of production at CBS, told USA TODAY Sports on Tuesday that the 68 teams involved in March Madness would be introduced within the first 15 minutes of the show. And, in alphabetical order, the teams were introduced by 6:13 pm ET, just under the estimate.

THE BRACKET: See all the NCAA tournament matchups | Printable

REGION CAPSULES: East | Midwest | South | West

BIGGEST SNUBS: Seven teams that had strong case to make NCAA field

COMMITTEE MISTAKES: Five teams that were either underseeded or overseeded

BRACKET ANALYSIS: Selection committee valued early wins, not late failures

Granted, it didn’t follow the same format it had for years – in which the teams were announced as the brackets were rolled out -– and that created some outcry on social media.

This new #SELECTIONSUNDAY show is painful. Shoulda just listed the bracket. This alphabetical stuff is nonsense. — bluestars07 (@bluestars07) March 11, 2018

Wow. This Selection Show might be the greatest example of “if it isn’t broke, don’t fix it” in the history of Earth.#SelectionSunday — Matt Elliott (@MonarchosMatt) March 11, 2018

Please do not call 911 to complain about the format of the NCAA tournament selection show. We can’t do anything about it, no matter how bad it is. — Lawrence Police (@LawrenceKS_PD) March 11, 2018

Unless you were hiding under a rock this week as teams clinched automatic berths by winning their conference tournament titles, the first 15 minutes of the show was potentially old news. But the exclusion of teams like the University of Southern Cal – which held a news conference shortly after its snub – did give bubble teams some closure early.

If you were hoping your team had secured a No. 1 seed, it wasn't until after the first commercial break that those were revealed. The four No. 1 seeds – Virginia, Villanova, Xavier and Kansas – weren't officially unveiled until shortly after the 68 teams were read off.

The brackets then began to trickle out over the next several minutes and were fully rolled out about 40 minutes into the show, about the same time span as last year and nearly half the time as in 2016 when CBS trickled the brackets out.

But since all the teams that made it already were announced, the bracket rollout lacked the usual celebratory and dejection footage for the bubble teams. Craig Barry, executive vice president and chief content officer, said that was "a small price to pay for doing what's best for the viewer."

Apparently, viewers had become accustomed to the drama when the show had been broadcast on CBS the previous 36 years.

Good gawd, this new #SelectionSunday format is a nightmare.



Completing killing the drama that used to make the show special and one of top TV events of the year.#MarchMadness@TBSNetwork — Jason Ludlow (@JasonMLudlow) March 11, 2018

This new #SelectionSunday show is garbage. Audio is way off and there is zero drama. — Steve Butt (@nflskins12) March 11, 2018

The selection show, like the broadcast coverage of the tournament, is produced as part of a partnership between CBS Sports and Turner Sports. Some audio and video hiccups – including in the audio in the show opener – marred parts of the two-hour show, which was hosted by Ernie Johnson and Greg Gumbel with Charles Barkley, Seth Davis, Clark Kellogg and Kenny Smith serving as analysts from Turner Sports' set in Atlanta.

The inclusion of a studio audience was, at times, an awkward addition to the show. Members of the audience were served pizzas courtesy of sponsor Pizza Hut, but when Johnson asked for a slice and forced the crowd to react, it was painful to watch.

Smith and Barkley worked on their bracket - with the usual back-and-forth that Johnson egged on - and their insights did add some value.

And I'm not sure I understand the "live audience" which sounds like roughly 23 people.#MarchMadness#SelectionSunday — Bob Herzog (@Bob_Herzog) March 11, 2018

They're doing the selection show in front of a live audience? This is lamer than I thought. #SelectionSunday — Jay Sarkar (@WLNSJaySarkar) March 11, 2018

The broadcast wasn’t universally panned.

“I thought it was exciting the way you unveiled it,” Kansas coach Bill Self said in an interview on the show.

Follow Perez on Twitter @byajperez

Contrary to popular belief, saving cash on a laptop doesn’t require that you hold out for the inevitable end of the year sales. Even at the beginning of every calendar year, there are hidden gems just begging to be bought that don’t cost an arm and a leg. Budget laptops are an omnipresent, inescapable force to be reckoned with. And, they’re threatening top PC makers into rethinking their business models.

That’s especially the case with the Chromebook lineup, a series of cheap laptops inspired by Google designed around the limitation of being browser-first. This, in turn, makes some budget laptops faster than their premium counterparts. At the same time, Microsoft is making great strides to bring Windows 10 into the 21st century with its thin, light and cloud-based operating system. Rumor has it, Windows 10 S is due for a drastic shake-up when it’s inevitably rebranded as a ‘mode’ within the existing Windows 10 Home and Pro.

These technological advancements aside, below we’ve denoted the best cheap laptops in no particular order. In doing so, we’ve had to go hands-on with every clamshell notebook we could find for an ultra-low price to determine which models bring affordability without compromise. For those looking to save their tax returns rather than spend them, you can take solace knowing that the following arrangement of recommendations comes from a place of experience and calculated research.

Acer Swift 3

The bigger, better value proposition

CPU: Intel Core i3 – i7 | Graphics: Intel HD Graphics 620 | RAM: 4GB – 8GB | Screen: 14-inch FHD (1,920 x 1,080) ComfyView IPS | Storage: 128GB – 256GB SSD

Powerful for the price

Stellar battery life

Boring looks

Down-firing speakers

Here we have one of the few budget laptops with a processor nearly equivalent to the MacBook Pro, that is, if you opt for the Intel Core i5 configuration. The best part? It’s roughly half the cost of its Apple-branded rival. Now given that it sells at a range of different prices, the Acer Swift 3 can be an obtuse purchase, but lucky for you, the midrange model will get you by just fine.

Read the full review: Acer Swift 3

Acer Switch 3

Spiritual successor to the Surface 3

CPU: Intel Pentium Quad Core N4200 | Graphics: Intel HD Graphics 505 | RAM: 4GB | Screen: 12.2-inch (1920 x 1200) IPS LCD | Storage: 64GB

Excellent build quality

Great screen

Tricky hinged stand

No good for games

Hear ye, the Acer Switch 3 is a feat to behold. This cheap laptop uses a low-power, albeit astoundingly efficient, Intel Pentium processor. However, internal specs are the least of its appeal. No, that honor goes to the Acer Switch 3’s novel ability to detach its screen from its keyboard. That only scratches the ‘surface’ of the inspiration it’s taken from Microsoft’s hardware too.

Read the full review: Acer Switch 3

Asus Transformer Mini T102HA

Small, portable and flexible

CPU: Intel Atom x5-Z8350 | Graphics: Integrated Intel HD Graphics | RAM: 4GB | Screen: 10.1-inch HD (1,280 x 800) LED touch display | Storage: 64GB

Tablet and laptop in one

Sizable hard drive

Tiny size could be tough

Its name is alphabet soup to the average reader, but then again this convertible laptop has always been about function over form. For one minuscule transaction, you’re getting a tablet equipped with an included keyboard and even a fingerprint scanner for more secure logins. Along with reliable performance and a magnesium-alloy chassis, it’s built to last.

Read the full review: Asus Transformer Mini T102HA

Samsung Chromebook Pro

First in a new generation of Chromebooks

CPU: 0.99Ghz Intel Core m3-6Y30 | Graphics: Intel HD Graphics 515 | RAM: 4GB | Screen: 12.3-inch, QHD (2,400 x 1,600) touchscreen | Storage: 32GB eMMC

Stunning, vivid screen

Stylus support on Chrome OS

Cramped keyboard

Weak speakers

With Android apps now supported on every new Chromebook released, it only makes sense to craft a Chromebook with a 12.3-inch QHD touch display, with a 360-degree hinge and pen support to boot. The Samsung Chromebook Pro may have a keyboard that’s a bit too compact for comfort, but it more than makes up for it, going as far as to master pen input on the first try.

Read the full review: Samsung Chromebook Pro

This product is only available in the US as of this writing. UK and Australian readers: check out a fine alternative in the Asus Chromebook Flip.

Acer Chromebook 15

Battery life like no other

CPU: 1.5GHz Intel Celeron 3205U | Graphics: Intel HD Graphics | RAM: 4GB | Screen: 15.59-inch, HD (1,920 x 1,080) touchscreen | Storage: 32GB SSD

Stunning battery life

Attractive, fanless design

Trackpad feels clunky

While it may be outclassed by the Pixelbook and the Samsung Chromebook in terms of sheer power, the Acer Chromebook 15 can still pack a wallop while providing battery life that is frankly out of this world. It’s rare that a laptop can truly provide all-day battery, but in our independent battery tests, Acer’s Chromebook lasted an astonishing 17 hours – on top of providing enough power to get your work done online. If you’re looking for a 15 inch Chromebook that will give you the most bang for your buck, look no further.

Read the full review: Acer Chromebook 15

Lenovo Yoga Book (Windows 10)

The netbook of the future – the ultra netbook?

CPU: 1.44GHz Intel Atom x5-Z8550 | Graphics: Intel HD Graphics 400 | RAM: 4GB | Screen: 10.1-inch FHD (1,920 x 1,200 resolution), IPS touchscreen | Storage: 64GB flash storage (plus 128GB with microSD)

Insanely thin and light

Keyboard surprisingly accurate

Woefully underpowered

Dated microUSB port

The Lenovo Yoga Book, and the Windows 10 version of it in particular, is the sort of futuristic fodder you would find in an episode of Black Mirror. It has a keyboard that doubles as a Wacom touch panel and, best of all, it’s cheap as hell. Now, of course, that comes with the caveat of a weak Intel Atom processor, but the rest of the Lenovo Yoga Book should go down in the history books.

Read the full review: Lenovo Yoga Book

Acer Chromebook 14

Meet the anti-MacBook Air

CPU: Intel Celeron N3160 | Graphics: Intel HD Graphics 400 | RAM: 4GB | Screen: 14-inch FHD (1,920 x 1,080) display | Storage: 32GB SSD

Top-notch build quality

Solid keyboard and touchpad

Full HD display

Flaky HD video playback

With its slick lines and a slim silhouette, the Acer Chromebook 14 makes for a subtle, snazzy laptop. Although its display isn't the most attractive we've seen, it’s still acceptable for full HD. On top of that, the keyboard and trackpad adhere to the principle of ‘it just works.’ The battery life is satisfactory as well despite falling a bit south of Acer's 12-hour claim in real-world use.

Read the full review: Acer Chromebook 14

This product is only available in the US and UK as of this writing. Australian readers: check out a fine alternative in the Samsung Chromebook Pro.

HP Pavilion 15

The de facto learning laptop lives on

CPU: AMD dual-core A9 APU – Intel Core i7 | Graphics: AMD Radeon R5 – Nvidia GTX 1050 | RAM: 6GB – 16GB | Screen: 15.6-inch HD (1,366 x 768) – FHD (1,920 x 1,080); touch optional | Storage: 512GB SSD – 1TB HDD

Thinner and lighter

Tons of options

Shallow, squishy keyboard

Frankly, this is a broke college student’s laptop , so as long as you go in with that in mind, you won’t be disappointed with the HP Pavilion 15. Possessing all the power you’ll need to get you through the semester, this laptop bears all of the essentials for an affordable price, so that you can save the rest of your cash for the crushing financial aid debt yet to come.

Read our hands-on review: HP Pavilion 15

Dell Inspiron 11 3000

Colorful can be cheap, too

CPU: Intel Celeron N3060 | Graphics: Intel HD Graphics | RAM: 2GB | Screen: 11.6-inch HD (1366 x 768) anti-glare LED-backlit display | Storage: 32GB eMMC

Lots of color choice

AC Wi-Fi

Barely HD screen

For those who like their laptops as colorful as they are affordable, the Dell Inspiron 11 3000 is a no-brainer. Although some users might find that it’s 11.6-inch display is too small, we would argue that this budget laptop is the perfect fit for your portable workspace. Plus, its bright and vibrant color scheme is loud enough that no one on your flight will confuse it for their own.

Lenovo IdeaPad 110s

A simple and reliable laptop

CPU: Intel Celeron N3160 | Graphics: Intel HD Graphics 400 | RAM: 2GB | Screen: 11.6-inch HD (1366 x 768) anti-glare | Storage: 32GB

Full SD card slot

AC Wi-Fi

Barely HD screen

The Lenovo IdeaPad 110s isn’t the company’s most high-end model of its signature laptop, but it does sport one of the most recognizable designs in all of computing. Even if the screen is only 11.6-inches small with a resolution hardly a step up from a 15-year-old TV, you can at least take solace in the fact that it is anti-glare. That goes without mentioning the port lineup, which accounts for everyone’s tastes.

HP Stream 14

Big and colorful for cheap

CPU: Intel Celeron N3060 | Graphics: Intel HD Graphics 400 | RAM: 4GB | Screen: 14-inch HD (1,366 x 768) SVA BrightView WLED-backlit | Storage: 32GB eMMC

Larger than most budget options

Free 25GB of Dropbox for 1 year

Barely HD screen

With a starting price of just above 200 large, the HP Stream 14 is a fine value for those seeking a strong if basic web browsing machine. It's cheaper than even some Chromebooks while offering a bigger screen and the fullness of Windows 10. Other 15-inchers lack the ergonomics and aesthetics of HP’s cheapest Windows laptop yet.

Want to see more cheap laptop deals? Check out our US, UK and Australian guides.

Watch the video below for the top 7 things to consider when buying a laptop.

Gabe Carey has also contributed to this article

CLOSE SportsPulse: Trysta Krick runs through surprises, snubs and other highlights from Selection Sunday as March Madness officially begins. USA TODAY Sports

Syracuse squeaked into the field of 68 as the most jaw-dropping selection of Selection Sunday. (Photo: Brad Penner, USA TODAY Sports)

The NCAA tournament selection committee doesn't have an easy job. But considering the euphoria of playing in the Big Dance and how critical matchups are for advancing to the second weekend, well, the cast of decision-makers isn't getting off the hook that easy.

While the committee got a good chunk of things right on Selection Sunday — bubble teams Arizona State and Oklahoma making the field because November and December legitimately matter and a majority of the top seeding lines on point — there's plenty of nitpicking to go over from 2018's pairings.

THE BRACKET: See all the NCAA tournament matchups | Printable

REGION CAPSULES: East | Midwest | South | West

BIGGEST SNUBS: Seven teams that had strong case to make NCAA field

COMMITTEE MISTAKES: Five teams that were either underseeded or overseeded

BRACKET ANALYSIS: Selection committee valued early wins, not late failures

Here's a look at five things the selection committee got wrong.

1. Syracuse is not a tourney team. Not even close.

The Orange do not belong in the field of 68. Perhaps last year's snub and 2016's Final Four run following the program's bubble inclusion were in the back of their heads. Whatever the case, it's head-scratching to rationalize this resume over the likes of USC, Middle Tennessee and even fellow ACC teams Notre Dame and Louisville.

The Orange’s best win came against Clemson late in the season, but outside of that victory there wasn't a ton of eye-raising material. ‘Cuse (20-13, 8-10) did have four Quadrant 1 wins and a top-20 non-conference strength of schedule — clearly features the committee valued.

2. West Virginia and Texas Tech could have switched No. 3 and No. 5.

The Mountaineers should have been a protected seed -- on the No. 4 line -- at the very least. Heck, their profile was good enough to possibly be ahead of Texas Tech, which snagged a No. 3 seed. WVU had better overall credentials and beat TTU twice. Maybe it was three losses to Kansas that the committee pinpointed.

CINDERELLAS: Five mid-majors that could bust brackets

TANKERS: Five ranked teams that could have trouble

3. Gonzaga didn't deserve that No. 4 seed, sorry.

Listen, the 'Zags have had a nice season in a horrible mid-major conference, the West Coast (that's why Saint Mary's got snubbed despite a 28-win profile). But the fact of the matter is there were just better teams on the No. 5 line that should have taken that spot. West Virginia is one of them. So was Kentucky, which looked really impressive in cutting down the nets in the SEC tournament championship on Sunday. Think about this: WVU played in the country's best RPI conference and UK played in the fourth-best RPI league. Gonzaga played in the nation's 13th worst conference. No non-conference schedule (the 'Zags beat Ohio State, Texas and Creighton) can make up for that.

4. Creighton and Florida State were overseeded big time.

The Bluejays probably didn't even deserve to be in the field of 68, but a correct seeding line would have been No. 10 or No. 11. How the committee came up with No. 8 is perplexing. Did that Villanova victory count twice? Same story with Florida State, a team that realistically should have been one of the last teams in the field based on a horrendous non-conference strength of schedule of 314. A No. 9 seed? Really? St. Bonaventure, which drew a No. 11 seed after a solid season in the Atlantic 10, should have undoubtedly taken one of those better seeds.

5. Florida and Houston should've been higher than No. 6.

Perhaps it's a blessing in disguise for these teams that they didn't end up on the No. 5 line, where No. 12 seed Cinderella upsets are more frequent than the No. 11 line. But still, what was the committee looking at here? Did it not watch Houston's AAC tournament showing, in which it knocked off Wichita State and went toe-to-toe with Cincinnati? And the Gators, which bowed out early in the SEC tournament, still had a résumé worthy of a No. 5 based on nine Quadrant 1 wins.

***

NCAA tourney language explainer

Quadrant 1 wins: Home games vs. 1-30 RPI teams; Neutral-site games vs. 1-50 RPI; Away games vs. 1-75 RPI

Home games vs. 1-30 RPI teams; Neutral-site games vs. 1-50 RPI; Away games vs. 1-75 RPI Quadrant 2 wins: Home games vs. 31-75 RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 51-100 RPI; Away games vs. 76-135 RPI

Home games vs. 31-75 RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 51-100 RPI; Away games vs. 76-135 RPI Quadrant 3 wins, losses: Home games vs. 76-160 RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 101-200 RPI; Away games vs. 136-240 RPI

Home games vs. 76-160 RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 101-200 RPI; Away games vs. 136-240 RPI Quadrant 4 wins, losses: Home games vs. 161-plus RPI; Neutral-site games vs. 201-plus RPI; Away games vs. 241-plus RPI

NCAA TOURNEY TEAMS DANCING IN 2018
