0.291*"mr" + 0.150*"trump" + 0.133*"north" + 0.129*"he" + 0.103*"said" + 0.100*"his" + 0.097*"korea" + 0.093*"i" + 0.088*"s9" + 0.088*"musk"

====================================
0: 0.971214
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyFinding Tenderness in Communities Affected by Manila’s Anti-Drug KillingsAdvertisement

lens Finding Tenderness in Communities Affected by Manila’s Anti-Drug Killings Image A child looks on as the police tape off sections off her neighbor’s house in Manila after a drug-related killing in her neighbor’s bathroom. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Hannah Reyes Morales photographed more than 20 corpses, as well as police officers and grieving families throughout Manila in 2016.

She was not alone.

Many local and international photographers were often nearby documenting the death toll from the brutal war on drugs started by Rodrigo Duterte, the Philippine president.

After a few nights, she grew tired of photographing the murder scenes that dominated the coverage. She admired her colleagues’ commitment to documenting the killings, but she felt she had little to add that was new. Instead, she turned her attention to the residents of the densely packed slums where most of the bodies were found.

“Crowds of families and children would gather to see what was going on, to see the journalists, to see the body, to see the police,” she said. “And then after the body would be packed up, people would retreat back into their homes very quietly. And I knew that the next day that they would have just a normal day.”

Image A young family in the streets outside a shanty community in Manila. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image A train running through a Manila slum. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image Filipino girls playing sungka, a popular game in the Philippines. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Most of the international coverage focused on the bodies and where they were found, Ms. Morales, 27, explained. But there are also “people and communities that continue to live amid all this violence and all this death.”

Since they were often overlooked, she said, she decided to photograph the daily lives of residents of these impoverished neighborhoods and put “a human face on those who are most affected.”

Ms. Morales returned to the scenes where she had photographed bodies and got to know the people who lived there. And she kept going back, visiting people at home and listening to their stories. Some of the people she photographed had lost a loved one to the drug wars, but many of them were neighbors .

The Philippine government insists that fewer than 4,000 people have been killed since Mr. Duterte took office in 2016. But last month, Human Rights Watch estimated that more than 12,000 suspected drug users and dealers, mostly from poor families, have died in the crackdown. Many of these killings occurred in a handful of very poor neighborhoods throughout Manila.

Image A woman and her dog at home in one of Manila's shanty communities. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image A young girl dressed as an undead bride in her neighborhood, where there have been multiple drug-related deaths. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image Jefferson, a developmentally disabled boy, smiles with his caretaker in the shanty home where he lives. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

International news media outlets paid attention as the body count skyrocketed in 2016, but most foreign journalists drifted away even as the killings continued through 2017. Between other assignments Ms. Morales continued to photograph the people who lived amid the violence.

Ms. Morales grew up in Manila, where she lived in a modest home with her single mother and more than a dozen relatives. It was, she said, “a simple life.” Going to school, she passed by informal settlements where people lived in ramshackle houses. She attended an all-girls Catholic school run by activist nuns, where part of the curriculum took students to visit these neighborhoods to see how others lived and to help them.

In high school, Ms. Morales volunteered to tutor children in these communities in reading and writing. Though she was not wealthy, she was “ luckier then they were,” she said. Yet she identified with these children and working with them was a formative experience.

Image Caroline and Anne during a birthday party in the shanty community San Andres Bukid. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image A pickup basketball game. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image Jerome Clemente, right, with his family in the home built by his brother, who was killed in the anti-drug campaign. Jerome named his newborn child after his brother. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

“I was always very much aware and curious about their lives, and I was already interested in photography, but I didn’t have a camera yet,” she said. “I wanted to photograph them, but l just didn’t have the means.”

Ms. Morales studied communication at the University of the Philippines, where she took a photography class. She got an internship with EPA, the European Pressphoto Agency, during which she had a photo published on Lens in Photos of the Day. She has been on assignment for National Geographic and CNN Philippines and has photographed for and contributed reporting to The New York Times.

Though the killings have slowed, Ms. Morales continues working on her project whenever she is home. Most of the people she photographs take pride in their community, she said, though gun violence was “just like a matter of fact for them and a part of daily life.” Her subjects are “well aware of the cards they have been dealt,” she said, yet “full of grace and very resilient.”

“We Filipinos are a hopeful people,” Ms. Morales said. “The tenderness and the love that I try to convey in the images for me is a part of the Filipino resilience — they keep their quality of life going even as all of this violence is happening around you.”

Image Residents of a shanty community whose homes burned down gather in a basketball court. Over 200 families lost their homes, and many cannot find the money to rebuild. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image A young boy examines a flower that his sister picked. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image A family living in a shanty community watches television. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Image A young girl sits where the Pasig River meets the Manila Bay, by the shanty community where she lives. Credit Hannah Reyes Morales

Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. Hannah Reyes Morales is on Instagram. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.

James Estrin, the co-editor of Lens, joined The Times as a photographer in 1992 after years of freelancing for the newspaper and hundreds of other publications. @JamesEstrin









====================================
1: 0.967066
https://www.theguardian.com/us/technologyFlorida shooting: students walk out of schools to call for gun control – videoStudents across the US are walking out of their schools to protest against gun violence and demand stricter gun laws after last week's massacre at Marjory Stoneman Douglas high school in Parkland, Florida. They're marching in solidarity with the survivors of the second deadliest public school shooting in US history to call for a ban on the sale of assault rifles of the sort used to kill 17 students and educators last week

====================================
2: 0.963036
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyThe Earliest Days of American PhotographyAdvertisement

lens The Earliest Days of American Photography Image A locomotive on the Baltimore and Ohio Railroad, near Oakland, Md., circa 1860. Credit The Metropolitan Museum of Art

The most forged documents in financial history were the work of ordinary rascals who needed little skill to make money. All they needed was a camera.

Newspaper articles in the late 1850s began warning of the danger of counterfeit bank notes that had been made using photography. Both had appeared in the United States in the 1830s after President Andrew Jackson eliminated the federal banking system, allowing private banks to issue paper currency under guidelines set by each state. At one point, forgeries accounted for 40 percent of the nation’s currency, with photography often to blame.

“For a time, the ease of modification and duplication enabled by negative-positive photography seemed to be a threat rather than a benefit,” said Mazie Harris, the curator of Paper Promises: Early American Photography, a new exhibition at the J. Paul Getty Museum in Los Angeles which runs through May 27.

Image The Armstead and White photograph gallery. Circa 1861-1865. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

Image Slaves on the Toller farm in 1862. By Alexander Gardner. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

Image Blanket boats ferrying men and field artillery over the Potomac River in July 1863. By A.J. Russell. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

Having just been introduced by two men working independently of each other — Henry Fox Talbot in England who claimed to invent (negative) photography and Louis Daguerre, in France, the (positive) silver-plated copper image — photography had a multitude of possible identities in the United States. The daguerreotype became one of the most popular methods after it was introduced in the United States, with studios established all over New York. But a very reproducible paper photograph was also used experimentally . And counterfeit money, the Getty Museum’s original inspiration for the exhibition, was only one of photography’s early uses.

“I think we tell this tidy story about how the history of photography works,” Ms. Harris said. “But the real history is a lot messier and more interesting than that. I was interested in the fact that there was this period of kind of unlimited potential, the earliest years of the medium when it really could have been anything.”

She added: “It was a brand new medium, no one knew what it had to look like or where it was going to go, and so there are all these paths open to the photographers of the time. Is it going to be A one-of-a-kind medium? Is it going to be a reproducible medium? Is it going to be on glass, or mica? Is it going to be circular?”

Image Abraham Lincoln and his son Thomas on Feb. 5, 1865. By Alexander Gardner. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

Image A portrait of a Dakota Sitter, circa 1862-1864. By J. E. Whitney. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

The merging of science and art was fertile ground for scientists and doctors, who experimented with glass, iron, leather, cloth and mica. John Adams Whipple, an American photographer and inventor, took out an advertisement in a popular bank-note report that cataloged currency, both legitimate and fraudulent, citing “crystalotypes,” or his own paper photographic process. The technique, which he invented to outrun his competitors, made paper prints from glass negatives.

“Made from life, or copied from daguerreotypes in the usual style,” he wrote, “up to portrait size, finished in crayon, or colored to equal the nest oil paintings in tone and finish — giving the likenesses in a manner that cannot be obtained in any other way.”

These illicit uses, often overlooked in photographic history, actually sabotaged the medium . Around the same time, the United States grappled with impermanent state borders and political triggers that would lead to the Civil War.

Image A girl in a dark jacket, circa 1857. By O.H. Willard. Credit Collection of Charles Isaacs and Carol Nigro

Image A portrait of Frederick Langenheim from 1849. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

“I sort of joked that the subtitle for the exhibition would be ‘Paper Photography in the Not-So United States,’” Ms. Harris said. “I mean, the United States isn’t even really the U.S. as we know it now. There were all these territories, the borders were really ill-defined. I got interested in this idea of sort of territorial negotiations. How are you negotiating these kind of geographic territories? How are you negotiating these medium, these territories between media?”

She continued: “It was just a really messy period, and so I think that if we put it in that kind of international context, then you see that Americans were really trying to find a place for themselves amid what’s going on in Europe.”

Still, the photographs in the show, no matter their circumstances, are beautiful. Some portraits are featured in the negative with the glow of golden light illuminating details.

“Sometimes you see a photo from the past and it just blows you away,” Ms. Harris said. “You think, ‘I saw someone exactly like that on the subway yesterday.’ These photographs really reach out and grab you and pull you into the past or pull themselves into the present.”

Image On battle field of Antietam. Maryland, Sept. 1862. By Alexander Gardner. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

Image The Oso House in Bear Valley, in Mariposa County, Calif., circa 1859-60. By Carleton Watkins. Credit The J. Paul Getty Museum

Image Lola Montez, circa 1858. Photographed by the Meade Brothers. Credit Stephen White, Collection II

Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.

====================================
3: 0.954161
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyCharles Campion, Campaign Adviser to Democrats, Dies at 62“I would say the political fundamentals which he learned on the streets of Boston, he was still applying in the streets of Michigan for Hillary Clinton in 2016,” said Senator Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, a close friend who was advised by Mr. Campion. “Chuck’s philosophy was that the message should be direct, simple and to the heart of the issue.”

Mr. Campion came up in Massachusetts politics as a member of Gov. Michael S. Dukakis’s administration from 1975 to 1978. He went on to work for President Jimmy Carter on advance planning.

It was in Washington that he got to know Mr. Mondale, the vice president under Mr. Carter. Mr. Mondale’s presidential campaign in 1984 would be Mr. Campion’s first.

“Politics is a fickle game,” he said in an interview with The New York Times in 1983 as he was building a campaign operation for Mr. Mondale in New Hampshire in advance of the state’s primary. No matter how bright a candidate’s prospects seem, he said, “you’re always worried about winning.”

New Hampshire was a case in point. Though Mr. Mondale led in the polls, he lost the primary in a stunning upset by Gary Hart, then a little-known senator from Colorado. (Mr. Mondale nevertheless went on to win the Democratic nomination before losing to President Ronald Reagan in a landslide.)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Campion came to know more losses working for other presidential campaigns, including those of Mr. Dukakis in 1988 (Mr. Campion was its political director), Vice President Al Gore in 2000 and Senator Kerry in 2004.

The Dewey Square Group said that in 2008, as an adviser to Mrs. Clinton’s first presidential run, it was Mr. Campion who arranged coffee events with voters ahead of the New Hampshire primary, including one at a coffee shop where she cried in conversation with a voter, generating wide publicity.

“He was a magician in understanding a community he hadn’t been into,” Mr. Kerry said. “He ran Michigan for me, and we won Michigan.”

Mr. Campion’s friends and family said he had been undeterred by the losses. “He never got discouraged, he never quit,” Ms. Campion said. “You have your values, you just keep going.”

As a founder of the Dewey Square Group, in 1993, and its chairman, Mr. Campion was familiar to Boston’s political scene. Sometimes he wrote jokes for the annual St. Patrick’s Day breakfast, an all-but-mandatory event for the local political class. He wrote one in 2003 for Mr. Kerry, who had recently discovered that he had Jewish ancestors.

“So who said I don’t have the matzo balls to be here today?” Mr. Kerry said, to laughter.

Mr. Campion was born in Boston on Aug. 20, 1955, the middle child and only son in a family of five children. A product of Brookline High School, he was a political science major at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst, graduating in 1977. He met his wife, the former Heather Pars, while he was working in the Carter administration. She was a speechwriter for the president.

In addition to his wife, with whom he lived in Brookline, Mass., Mr. Campion is survived by their son, Maxwell; their daughter, Courtney Campion; his sisters, Rosella, Suzanne, Tracy and Leigh, all with the surname Campion; a half brother, Christian Richard; and his mother, Mary Donlan Richard.

Mr. Campion’s family said he did not slow down in his later years, even as he endured the three kidney transplants. In one instance, five years ago, his wife said, 37 people stepped forward to be tested as possible donors.

“He had more best friends that anyone I know,” she said.

====================================
4: 0.950256
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyChristopher Liddell Is Front-Runner to Become Trump’s Top Economic AdviserSince joining the administration in early 2017, Mr. Liddell has worked closely with Jared Kushner, the president’s son-in-law and senior adviser, on efforts to streamline and update some government functions. That includes the way the government buys technology or the services it offers citizens online.

Mr. Liddell has his detractors, both in the administration and outside it. Some critics say his record in the administration does not match the prominence of the post for which he is now being considered, noting privately that the Office of American Innovation, where Mr. Liddell is a key member of a team led by Mr. Kushner, has a thin record of achievement.

Others noted that Mr. Liddell had a role in selecting personnel during the transition, an endeavor that has been widely perceived as subpar.

But as a former chief financial officer of Microsoft and General Motors, Mr. Liddell has the sort of experience that could fulfill the president’s interest in someone with a corporate résumé who is also known to his existing staff, according to the officials familiar with the discussions.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Liddell, a New Zealander by birth, became Microsoft’s chief financial officer in 2005, leading the company through the economic downturn. After joining General Motors in 2010, he helped guide the automaker’s recovery from bankruptcy and execute the company’s return to the public market. He also served as the chief financial officer of International Paper, and more recently, took on that role at the Hollywood talent agency William Morris Endeavor.

Mr. Liddell would also bring extensive management experience from his time in politics.

In 2012, he served as the executive director of Mitt Romney’s presidential transition team, where his job centered on process, not policy. During that time, Mr. Liddell revealed few policy preferences with his colleagues, though he was viewed as an effective supervisor.

Although Mr. Romney lost the presidential election, Mr. Liddell helped write a book on the team’s planning process, “Romney Readiness Project.” The book chafed some on the transition team, who had viewed Mr. Liddell as highly ambitious in the job, and saw the book as trying to claim more credit for the transition than he deserved.

Mr. Liddell’s background and public comments suggest that he could mimic Mr. Cohn’s role in the administration as an ambassador to the business community.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We will deal with any businesses that are knowledgeable and can contribute in a way that we think is constructive on the agenda that we have,” Mr. Liddell told a conference of chief executives that The Wall Street Journal held in November. “The message I would give to people is, we’re not there to necessarily deal with every individual company’s every individual issue. That’s not us. We have multiple stakeholders that we need to address.”

“But businesses know that this is an administration that is receptive to feedback from business,” he added. “This is an administration that will listen to businesses of all natures, large and small, of any industry in thinking about policy frameworks.”

In a break from Mr. Cohn and business leaders, however, Mr. Liddell appears more sympathetic to Mr. Trump’s populist trade agenda. After Mr. Trump’s election in 2016, Mr. Liddell told a New Zealand journalist that “I think the days of unbridled free trade and unbridled free markets are over.”

“I worked in the private sector all my life, so I’m a believer in free markets, but not unbridled free markets,” Mr. Liddell said. “And we’ve had 30 years since the mid-’80s, both in New Zealand and here in the U.S. and globally, of basically free markets being driving the whole thinking, the whole rhetoric around governing. I think those days are over, personally. I think we’re going to go through a circular trend of a much more restrained free market.”

====================================
5: 0.948985
http://www.bbc.com/news/technologyTop US figure skating coach suspended over alleged sexual misconductImage copyright Jamie Squire/Getty Image caption Richard Callaghan (r) trained Tara Lipinski (c) who went on to win Olympic gold in 1998

A renowned figure skating coach who has mentored Olympic and world champions has been suspended by US Figure Skating, the organisation said.

Richard Callaghan, 72, is barred from any figure skating activities pending a fresh investigation into decades-old allegations of sexual misconduct.

When several male skaters levelled their accusations in the 1990s, the veteran coach "vehemently denied" them.

A watchdog to prevent sexual abuse of athletes will investigate the case.

"US Figure Skating suspended the membership of Richard Callaghan on March 6, 2018, in compliance with the policies and procedures of the US Center for SafeSport," the sport's governing board said in a statement on Friday.

Mr Callaghan told ABC News he had not been officially notified of the suspension. He also declined to speak about the allegations.

SafeSport, established last year, examines complaints of sexual abuse and other mistreatment of athletes.

Craig Maurizi, 56, first made his allegations against Mr Callaghan public in a 1999 New York Times article. He is reported to have recently complained to SafeSport but has declined to confirm this.

Now an Olympic coach himself, Mr Maurizi alleged that the coach engaged in sexually inappropriate behaviour with him when he was 15.

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption Richard Callaghan (l) coached notable figure skaters including 1996 world champion Todd Eldredge (r)

Mr Maurizi also accused Mr Callaghan of abusing his position of authority to begin a full sexual relationship with him starting when he was 18 years old and continuing for a few years.

US Figure Skating acknowledged it looked into Mr Maurizi's accusations in 1999 but took no action as the alleged wrongdoing dated back to a decade earlier.

Mr Callaghan, known for training Tara Lipinski to an Olympic gold medal in 1998, had been allowed by US Figure Skating to continue coaching.

"Richard Callaghan should not have been coaching for many, many years and this was a chance to end his access to young skaters," Mr Maurizi told USA Today on Friday.

When the veteran coach was approached by ABC News in Florida, he said he was retired and coaching a few times per week. "No one's notified me [of the suspension], I just saw a note on a website somewhere," he said.

When asked about Mr Maurizi's allegations, he said: "That's 19 or 20 years ago. I have nothing to say."

====================================
6: 0.945967
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyWashington’s Unloved Subway Opens a Swag Shop. Riders Aren’t Rushing the Doors.The M Shop’s challenges were summed up this week by a watchdog group, Citizens Against Government Waste. “Failing D.C. Metrorail Opens Absurd Swag Shop,” the group wrote on its website, noting that the crisis-plagued system “has been labeled ‘the worst in the world,’ and its financial situation has been characterized as a ‘death spiral.’”

Photo

The Twitter account @UnsuckDCMetro, a gathering place for Metro malcontents, lit up. “When you dropping the ‘Sorry for the Inconvenience, We’ll Be Moving Momentarily’ crewneck sweatshirt?” one wrote.

Metro serves the second-highest number of passengers in the nation, after New York. When it opened in 1976, “it was really ‘The Jetsons’ — a futuristic system,” said Jack Evans, a District of Columbia council member and chairman of the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority board, which oversees the system. “Now everything’s 40 years old and it’s really falling apart.”

Some of Metro’s 1970s railcars are still in use. Long-deferred network maintenance has led to breakdowns, track deterioration and multiple disasters, including a 2009 collision that killed nine people. The busiest route, the Red Line, “leaks like a sieve, and whenever it rains, you get puddles and the wires fall into the puddles and they catch fire and you get smoke incidents,” Mr. Evans said. “Nobody wants to hear that.”

There have been some improvements. In 2017, Metro wrapped up a yearlong, $150 million maintenance blitz aimed at bringing its infrastructure back from the brink of collapse. Metro officials say the program, SafeTrack, was successful, and has made the system significantly less dangerous and more reliable.

Still, Metro’s general manager, Paul Wiedefeld, told the board of directors last year that the system needed $15.5 billion in long-term funding just to maintain the subpar status quo.

“We’re on the right track now, but it’s going to take a lot of work and a lot of money,” Mr. Evans said, adding that the District, Maryland and Virginia are nearing a deal to supply $500 million annually in funding to Metro, which is what the transit authority says it needs to improve reliability and safety. Metro’s modest ambitions are summed up by a new slogan: “Back2Good.” Ads trumpeting new railcars say, “They smell better.”

Photo

Other city subways sell branded merchandise. But Washington’s subway lacks the history, though not the electrical fires, of New York’s. It can’t boast the “Mind the Gap” panache, or the 99 percent on-time rate of London’s Tube, whose former chairman, Tony Ridley, called Metro “so sad.” It can’t top the socialist-realist glamour of Moscow’s Metro, whose “M” logo resembles Washington’s but whose working escalators do not.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Surly commuters heralded the M Shop grand opening with a stream of invective. The Washington Post’s commuter newspaper, Express, had an entire column trolling the M Shop. Caption for the cuff links: “Be careful not to lose these cuff links — if a stray one falls onto a track, it could cause rippling delays throughout the system.”

One critic tweeted a photo of the sparsely attended opening with the caption, “Can I buy some of this standing room to take on the train?”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Jawauna Greene, Metro’s marketing director, tweeted back, “Thanks haters!!! We are making money.”

Making matters worse, M Shop customers must stand in a queue that leads to a gate that leads to a row of ticket windows behind bulletproof glass. Shoppers make choices from a 35-page catalog, but they learned that items on half of the pages were available only online. A staff member relayed the order to other workers in a storage area, who schlepped the goods to the ticket windows, where payment was made through a slot and a feedback-prone intercom. Purchases, packed in a shiny Pop Art shopping bag, were delivered through a door in the barrier.

“I appreciate the sense of humor” of the venture, said Arielle, a 27-year-old federal employee who declined to give her last name because she was shopping during work hours. She laughed at the yoga pants printed with “Foggy Bottom,” a Metro stop near the State Department, but said, “I’m not sure it’s a brilliant idea to walk around D.C. with that on your pants.” Instead she chose a “Stress Reliever,” a squeezable foam replica of a railcar, for $6.95. “Those aren’t available,” the clerk told her.

Arielle rolled her eyes: “That is so Metro, to be out of stress relievers.”

Mr. Evans insisted the shop’s detractors were simply more vocal and that some people were pleased. On his rounds through the city, he said, he had heard from a few satisfied customers — along with the people who say, “‘I got caught in a tunnel and the train caught fire.’”

====================================
7: 0.940271
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyThe Man Who Knew Too LittleImage Erik Hagerman heads out for his morning ritual, a 30-minute drive into town for coffee and a scone at his favorite coffee shop in Athens, Ohio. Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times The Man Who Knew Too Little The most ignorant man in America knows that Donald Trump is president — but that’s about it. Living a liberal fantasy is complicated. Erik Hagerman heads out for his morning ritual, a 30-minute drive into town for coffee and a scone at his favorite coffee shop in Athens, Ohio.CreditDamon Winter/The New York Times











GLOUSTER, Ohio — At first, the experiment didn’t have a name.

Right after the election, Erik Hagerman decided he’d take a break from reading about the hoopla of politics.

Donald Trump’s victory shook him. Badly. And so Mr. Hagerman developed his own eccentric experiment, one that was part silent protest, part coping mechanism, part extreme self-care plan.

He swore that he would avoid learning about anything that happened to America after Nov. 8, 2016.

“It was draconian and complete,” he said. “It’s not like I wanted to just steer away from Trump or shift the conversation. It was like I was a vampire and any photon of Trump would turn me to dust.”

It was just going to be for a few days. But he is now more than a year into knowing almost nothing about American politics. He has managed to become shockingly uninformed during one of the most eventful chapters in modern American history. He is as ignorant as a contemporary citizen could ever hope to be.

James Comey. Russia. Robert Mueller. Las Vegas. The travel ban. “Alternative facts.” Pussy hats. Scaramucci. Parkland. Big nuclear buttons. Roy Moore.

He knows none of it. To Mr. Hagerman, life is a spoiler.

“I just look at the weather,” said Mr. Hagerman, 53, who lives alone on a pig farm in southeastern Ohio. “But it’s only so diverting.”

He says he has gotten used to a feeling that he hasn’t experienced in a long time. “I am bored,” he said. “But it’s not bugging me.”

Image Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times

It takes meticulous planning to find boredom. Mr. Hagerman commits as hard as a method actor, and his self-imposed regimen — white-noise tapes at the coffee shop, awkward scolding of friends, a ban on social media — has reshaped much of his life.

Extreme as it is, it’s a path that likely holds some appeal for liberals these days — a D.I.Y. version of moving to Canada.

Democrats, liberals and leftists have coped with this first year of the Trump presidency in lots of ways. Some subsist on the thin gruel of political cartoon shows and online impeachment petitions. Others dwell online in the thrilling place where conspiracy is indistinguishable from truth. Others have been inspired to action, making their first run for public office, taking local action or marching in their first protest rally.

Mr. Hagerman has done the opposite of all of them.

The fact that it’s working for him — “I’m emotionally healthier than I’ve ever felt,” he said — has made him question the very value of being fed each day by the media. Why do we bother tracking faraway political developments and distant campaign speeches? What good comes of it? Why do we read all these tweets anyway?

“I had been paying attention to the news for decades,” Mr. Hagerman said. “And I never did anything with it.”

At some point last year, he decided his experiment needed a name. He considered The Embargo, but it sounded too temporary. The Boycott? It came off a little whiny.

Mr. Hagerman has created a fortress around himself. “Tiny little boats of information can be dangerous,” he said.

He decided that it would be called The Blockade.

Behind the Blockade

For a guy who has gone to great lengths to essentially plug his ears, Mr. Hagerman sure does talk a lot. He is witty and discursive, punctuating his stories with wild-eyed grins, exaggerated grimaces and more than the occasional lost thread.

I recently spent two days visiting his farm on the condition that I not bring news from the outside world. As the sun set over his porch, turning the rolling hills pink then purple then blue, he held forth, jumping from English architecture to the local pigs’ eating habits to his mother’s favorite basketball team to the philosophy of Kant. He can go days without seeing another soul.

This life is still fairly new. Just a few years ago, he was a corporate executive at Nike (senior director of global digital commerce was his official, unwieldy title) working with teams of engineers to streamline the online shopping experience. Before that, he had worked digital jobs at Walmart and Disney.

“I worked 12-, 14-hour days,” he said. “The calendar completely booked.”

But three years ago, he decided he had saved enough money to move to a farm, make elliptical sculptures — and, eventually, opt out of the national conversation entirely.

He lives alone and has never been married. As for money, a financial adviser in San Francisco manages his investments. Mr. Hagerman says he throws away the quarterly updates without reviewing them.

Mr. Hagerman grew up in southeastern Ohio, and after years spent in Brooklyn warehouses, San Francisco tech bubbles and Nike-land in Portland, Ore., the idea of a quiet life became more and more appealing. His mother lives nearby; he sees her a lot since he moved back in 2015. She reluctantly adheres to The Blockade, although they do discuss the Cleveland Cavaliers.

Image Mr. Hagerman drives from his home into Athens for his morning rituals. Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times

Image Mr. Hagerman sits down with his sketch book, in his regular seat, in the same room, with his same triple, whole milk latte and cranberry scone he has each day at Donkey Coffee. Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times

Mr. Hagerman begins every day with a 30-minute drive to Athens, the closest city of note, to get a cup of coffee — a triple-shot latte with whole milk. He goes early, before most customers have settled into the oversize chairs to scroll through their phones. To make sure he doesn’t overhear idle chatter, he often listens to white noise through his headphones. (He used to listen to music, “but stray conversation can creep in between songs.”)

At Donkey Coffee, everyone knows his order, and they know about The Blockade. “Our baristas know where he’s at so they don’t engage him on topics that would make him uncomfortable,” said Angie Pyle, the coffee shop’s co-owner.

Mr. Hagerman has also trained his friends. A close friend from his Nike days, Parinaz Vahabzadeh, didn’t think he was quite serious at first and, in the early days of The Blockade, kept dropping little hints about politics.

The new administration compelled her to engage more deeply in politics, not less. She had only recently become a United States citizen, and she was passionate about the immigration debate. She did not let Mr. Hagerman opt out easily. “I was needling him,” she said.

And in response, she received, for the first time, a stern text message. “I’m now officially cross with you,” he wrote. “As you know very well I don’t wish to hear about current events. I know you don’t agree with my wishes but I do expect you to respect them.”

They now speak on the phone several times a week, but never about the news. “I’ve gotten used to it,” she said. “It’s actually nice to not talk about politics.”

Conversations with Mr. Hagerman can have a Rip Van Winkle quality. He spoke several times about his sister, Bonnie, an assistant professor, who lives in, of all places, Charlottesville, Va.

While he and I were talking, I looked over at him at every mention of Charlottesville to see if the name of the city, home to perhaps the ugliest weekend of the Trump era to date, made him flinch.

“So, do you associate Charlottesville” — I would say the name deliberately and with emphasis — “with anything besides your sister?”

He didn’t bite. I think he really didn’t know about the Nazis.

Later, he pointed to a house on a hill and said that before the election, the neighbor had decorated his lawn with an effigy of Hillary Clinton behind bars. I wanted to point out that the recently unveiled Mueller indictment found that a Russian troll had paid for a Hillary impersonator at a Florida rally. But I bit my tongue — Mr. Hagerman didn’t know about Mueller, or Russia, or trolls.

Image Above Mr. Hagerman's bed is an art piece from a series he is currently working on at his home. Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times

Image Mr. Hagerman works on creating a prototype for a new art project in his wood shop in a barn on his property. Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times

Last winter, Mr. Hagerman spent several weeks visiting his twin brother, a tech C.E.O., in San Francisco. Strict arrangements had to be made — the Sunday newspaper kept out of sight, the TV switched off, his teenage niece and nephew under special instructions.

“The bigger challenge was when we would have friends come over and visit,” said his brother, Kris. “We had to have Erik not be there, or we would give them a heads up that Erik has this news blockade going and we gave them the guidelines.

“They were always a little bemused by it. And to some extent a little envious,” he said. “The prospect of just chucking all that for a period of time felt somewhat appealing.”

To be fair, Mr. Hagerman has made a few concessions. He reads The New Yorker’s art reviews, but is careful to flip past the illustrated covers, which often double as political commentary. He watches every Cavaliers game, but only on mute.

He counts a few boats that have sailed past The Blockade. He saw a picture of Kim Jong-un on a newspaper at the coffee shop, signaling that something was up with North Korea. And he overheard someone saying something about Obamacare, which meant health care was back in the news. His brother alerted him to the Equifax breach for his own protection.

“But the blockade has been pretty damn effective,” Mr. Hagerman said.

He said that with some pride, but he has the misgivings about disengaging from political life that you have, by now, surely been shouting at him as you read. “The first several months of this thing, I didn’t feel all that great about it,” he said. “It makes me a crappy citizen. It’s the ostrich head-in-the-sand approach to political outcomes you disagree with.”

It seems obvious to say, but to avoid current affairs is in some ways a luxury that many people, like, for example, immigrants worried about deportation, cannot afford.

“He has the privilege of constructing a world in which very little of what he doesn’t have to deal with gets through,” said his sister, Bonnie Hagerman. “That’s a privilege. We all would like to construct our dream worlds. Erik is just more able to do it than others.”

What if, he began to think, he could address his privilege, and the idea of broader good, near to home?

He has a master project, one that he thinks about obsessively, that he believes can serve as his contribution to American society.

He calls it The Lake.

At the Lake

On a recent spookily warm day, Mr. Hagerman clambered up a steep bank of woods, pushing past vines and stepping past fallen logs.

Wide-eyed, giddy with excitement, he led the way to a flat stretch of brush where he spread his arms and began talking even faster than usual. “This is where we’ll build a giant barn. It will feel like a cathedral. The cloister will be here,” he said, making reference to Chartres, and Oxford, and the grandeur of medieval cathedrals.

About nine months ago, he bought some 45 acres of land on the site of a former strip mine. The property, untouched for decades, has been reclaimed by nature — deer, beavers, salamanders and canopies of majestic trees are thriving.

We walked further to the edge of a steep drop-off. Below, a bright blue lake shimmered in the February heat like a secret. He’ll debate as long as you want whether the body of water counts as a lake or a pond. It’s easier if you just agree it’s a lake.

“You wouldn’t believe how great it feels to go swimming there,” he said. He added, with almost rapturous glee, that the lake sits in the spot where the mining company dug deepest.

Image Mr. Hagerman chats with Gary Conley, left, a landscape ecologist working with him to conserve wetland habitats on his property outside Athens. Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times

Image Mr. Conley holds a juvenile salamander from a vernal pool. Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times

Mr. Hagerman sees this land as his life’s work. He plans to restore it, protect it, live on it and then preserve it for the public. “I will never sell this land,” he said.

He wouldn’t put it exactly this way, but he talks about the land in part as penance for the moral cost of his Blockade. He has come to believe that being a news consumer doesn’t enhance society. He also believes that restoring a former coal mine and giving it to the future does.

“I see it as a contribution that has civic relevance that aligns with my passions and what I do well,” Mr. Hagerman said. “I’m going to donate it. It’s going to take most of my net worth. That’s what I’m going to spend the rest of my money on.”

He has filled an entire room of his house with a 3-D rendering of the property to better envision his plans. He has hired Gary Conley, a local landscape ecologist, to advise on the project. Mr. Conley, a gentle bearded outdoorsman who can speak at length about the preferences of the local amphibians, believes that the land could become something special.

Mr. Conley indulges Mr. Hagerman’s fantasies for the land — a walkway modeled on an ancient Mayan ballgame! Land art inspired by “Spiral Jetty”! Windows and concrete blocks, so many blocks! — but Mr. Conley mainly serves as the straight man to inject ecological reality into the plan.

Mr. Conley respects The Blockade. After all, the project of The Lake might not exist without it.

Image Credit Damon Winter/The New York Times

In those carefree pre-Trump days, Mr. Hagerman would settle into the coffee shop with his newspaper and dig in. But after The Blockade, he could only read the weather — “For elderly men it’s endlessly interesting” — and the real estate listings.

It was during one of those long boring mornings, with no news to read, that he found the listing for The Lake.

“The first time I saw it, I said, ‘This is it,’” he said.

Order Reprints | Today’s Paper | Subscribe A version of this article appears in print on , on Page ST 1 of the New York edition with the headline: The Man Who Knew Too Little









====================================
8: 0.939396
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyAT&T Backs Off Political Argument in Antitrust CaseNoticeably absent in AT&T’s filing was an earlier argument it had made: that the government singled out the company’s deal because of presidential politics. President Trump was a vocal critic of the deal during his presidential campaign, and while in office, he has consistently blamed CNN, a channel owned by Turner and part of Time Warner’s television business, for unfair coverage of his administration.

AT&T originally argued to the court that the Justice Department’s suit was a case of “selective enforcement” — that the government was essentially blocking the deal because the president was against it.

But late last month, Judge Richard J. Leon, who is overseeing the trial, rejected demands by AT&T for detailed email and phone logs between the White House and the Justice Department related to the deal. AT&T and Time Warner has dropped “selective enforcement” as a defense, according to the new filings.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Interested in All Things Tech? The Bits newsletter will keep you updated on the latest from Silicon Valley and the technology industry. Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Even absent the question of presidential interference in the deal, the trial is pivotal for the telecom and media industries, providing a clue about the chances of other industry deals, like Disney’s bid for 21st Century Fox. AT&T’s chief executive, Randall Stephenson, and Time Warner’s chief executive, Jeffrey Bewkes, are expected to take the stand.

“This is the single most important decision this year” for technology, telecom and media firms, said Amy Yong, a research analyst at Macquarie Group in New York. “It will frame regulation and mergers and acquisitions going forward and raise questions about all the consolidation in the past, too.”

If the judge sides with AT&T and Time Warner, he would usher in the creation of a new kind of corporate behemoth — one with nationwide reach via wireless and satellite television service that would also have control over a movie studio and channels like HBO, CNN and TNT, which has valuable basketball sports rights.

The company would have a leading position to negotiate licensing deals with rival telecom and media firms. It would also be in a stronger position against fast-growing streaming video services like Netflix and Amazon Prime Video.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

If the Justice Department prevails in this suit, it would signal a new era of scrutiny for the media and telecom industries. In 2011, Comcast won approval for its purchase of NBCUniversal that also created an enormous telecom and media company. The Justice Department insisted on several conditions that restricted Comcast from anti-competitive business practices.

The trial will also reveal much about the state of the industry. Rivals such as Comcast, Dish and Sony are expected to be called as witnesses to reveal details about their business dealings with AT&T and Time Warner in the past. The Justice Department is expected to argue that a combined AT&T and Time Warner would have the incentive to make it harder for competing media companies to distribute their programming through AT&T, and for Time Warner brands to limit their distribution outside of AT&T.

The Justice Department will also present economic analysis suggesting that the new company is likely to raise prices for consumers.

“As will be shown at trial, the government is challenging this merger to address the real concerns of real people who populate the real marketplace today,” the Justice Department said in its brief.

AT&T said it would challenge the government’s arguments that the merger would increase consumer prices and hamper competition by raising licensing fees for Time Warner content. The company said it would argue that the merger of two companies that do not compete would be a stronger competitor in a market that had many new companies from Silicon Valley, like Facebook and Netflix.

“As will be demonstrated at trial, the new video revolution is defined by the spectacular rise of Netflix, Amazon, Google, and other vertically integrated, direct-to-consumer technology companies as market leaders in both video programming and video distribution,” AT&T said in its brief.

====================================
9: 0.937194
http://www.bbc.com/news/technologyTrump: N Korea talks could bring world's 'greatest deal'Image copyright Jeff Swensen/Getty

US President Donald Trump has said his planned summit with North Korean leader Kim Jong-un could either fail or lead to the "greatest deal for the world".

At a political rally in Pennsylvania, Mr Trump told supporters he believed North Korea wanted to make peace.

But he said he might leave the talks quickly if it didn't look like progress for nuclear disarmament could be made.

In his speech, the US leader warned of tariffs on European cars, and launched his slogan for re-election in 2020.

What did he say about North Korea?

"Hey, who knows what's going to happen?" said Mr Trump on Saturday at the rally for a Republican congressional candidate. "I may leave fast or we may sit down and make the greatest deal for the world."

In his wide-ranging speech, he said he hoped a deal to ease nuclear tensions would happen, particularly to help countries like North Korea.

He also said he believed the North Koreans would honour their commitment not to test any more missiles. Mr Trump told the crowd: "I think they want to make peace, I think it's time."

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption Kim Jong-un and Donald Trump: From enemies to frenemies?

Where could the talks be held?

No date or place has been set for the meeting, despite initial reports it would happen by the end of May.

South Korea's presidential office said the North Korean truce village of Panmunjom, which sits at the demilitarised zone between the North and the South, was a "serious" option, Yonhap news agency reported.

Sweden, Switzerland and China have also been named as possible hosts.

No sitting US president has ever met a North Korean leader and Mr Trump's decision to accept an invitation from the North Korean leader - relayed by South Korean envoys on Thursday - reportedly took top administration officials by surprise.

Skip Twitter post by @realDonaldTrump The deal with North Korea is very much in the making and will be, if completed, a very good one for the World. Time and place to be determined. — Donald J. Trump (@realDonaldTrump) March 10, 2018 Report

Mr Trump tweeted that a deal was "very much in the making", though the White House said the meeting would not take place unless Pyongyang took "concrete actions".

The US has made "zero concessions" with its sanctions, said Vice-President Mike Pence, following news of the upcoming meeting being agreed. He said he believed North Korea's willingness to talk proved the US strategy of isolating the country was working.

Trump unveiled his 2020 election slogan

This was a speech meant for Mr Trump's core supporters, the BBC Washington correspondent Chris Buckler says.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption President Trump unveils the slogan for his own re-election campaign in 2020

The president was supporting a Republican bid for a seat in congress but the packed out rally looked and felt like the start of the presidential campaign, our correspondent adds.

He announced that his 2020 re-election campaign slogan would be: "Keep America Great, exclamation point."

Appealing to his base, he again raised the possibility of the death penalty for drug dealers.

And tariffs?

President Trump talked tough on trade, describing tariffs as his baby.

He re-iterated his threat to tax cars imported from the European Union, saying that the EU better raise barriers and get rid of its own tariffs.

"If you're not going to do that, we're going to tax Mercedes Benz, we're going to tax BMW," he said.

Mr Trump's words may raise concerns or rile up anger overseas, our correspondent says, but it appealed to the audience Mr Trump wanted to address - his core supporters.

"For years the United States has been getting dumped on," said one supporter at the rally. "Donald Trump is the master of the art of the deal."

====================================
10: 0.935986
https://www.theguardian.com/us/technologyHow to persuade people (hint: not by telling them they're stupid)Social psychologist Robert Cialdini helped Obama in the 2012 election. Influence, he says, can come down to the right word in the right place

Despite the turmoil unleashed by his administration, Donald Trump voters remain committed to their president, which is quite the conundrum for a Democratic party debating how to bounce back in 2020.

In previous elections, the Democrats have sought the help of social psychologist Robert Cialdini. A professor at Arizona State University who pioneered the study of persuasion, Cialdini was part of a team of behavioural scientists that helped propel Obama to victory in 2012. He was also consulted in the early stages of Hillary Clinton’s campaign, though, he points out, he was much less involved in that race. Clinton’s major disadvantage, he believes, was that she was a continuity candidate in a change election.

“I would have advised her to say Obama’s policies have been brilliant but the state of the country is different now ... and we’re going to accommodate our policies to the new state of affairs,” he says. “That would have allowed her to be a change candidate in a change election.”

Were the Democrats to seek his advice this time, Cialdini would tell them to resist blaming the president’s supporters. “[Trump voters] don’t want to believe that they were stupid,” he says. “Cognitive dissonance research shows that the more consequential your error, the less willing you are to believe it was an error, because that undercuts your view of yourself as a good decision maker.”

Reassuring Trump voters that the consequences of their actions couldn’t have been predicted and allowing them to save face is the more persuasive approach – and he sees a parallel with the Brexit vote. “The bigger the mess, the less people want to believe they’re responsible for it, so they don’t register it as an error.”

Cialdini popularised the theory of social proof, which maintains that people will often look to their peers to decide what to think and how to behave. His book, Influence, published in 1984 and one of the best-selling books on behavioural psychology, was followed by a sequel two years ago, Pre-suasion, in which he explains the ideal conditions for exerting influence.

Cialdini’s principles of persuasion have long been applied to marketing and business management. Successfully winning people over, in every field from politics to the workplace, he says, can come down to the right word in the right place. If you are presenting an idea at work and you want to get your team on side, whatever you do, don’t ask for their opinion on it, Cialdini says. “When we ask someone for an opinion that person takes a half step back from us and becomes a critic.” Instead of using the word opinion, you should ask for advice on your plan. “That person takes a half step forward because the word ‘advice’ asks for their collaboration.”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest ‘Trump would often say: “Turn your TV cameras round, look at all of these people who are here.”’ Photograph: Julie Dermansky/Corbis via Getty Images

HMRC also uses psychological insights to influence behaviour. The government’s behavioural insights team, or “nudge unit”, added a line to tax letters sent to the public saying that the majority of UK citizens pay their taxes on time, which it claimed raised an extra £210m in payments. Cialdini says his UK-based consultancy, Influence At Work, advised HMRC to put that line in.

A similar use of the social proof principle was on display in Obama’s 2012 campaign. The venues Obama spoke at were vast, and instead of flags and banners, he had people behind him on the podium. In this way, he explains, Obama was able to validate his legitimacy as a candidate and make observers think: “If a lot of people have decided this guy is worthy of their support, then he’s at least worthy of my attention.” Trump took this pioneering tactic to another level.



“At the beginning of his speech, Trump would often say ‘Turn your TV cameras round, look at all of these people who are here’, so he specifically established the size of the crowd and the enthusiasm for him as a candidate before he began the speech.”

Trump also presented himself as someone who had conquered the world of business to establish himself as an authority figure, another persuasive tactic. This approach is something the Democrats could now turn to their advantage if they characterise Trump’s view of the US government as a company he owns and can do what he wants with, Cialdini believes. “I think most people would have a negative reaction to that.”

There is an argument that deploying psychological insights to change behaviour can amount to influence by stealth or manipulation. But Cialdini believes that the ethics of persuasion should only be called into question if the information presented in order to gain influence is false.



“If the evidence is accurate then not only is it ethically acceptable, it’s ethically commendable that we inform people into choices that sit with the existing information or evidence on the topic,” he says.

Ultimately, anyone seeking to be more influential should never underestimate the value of being nice to people. Paying someone a genuine compliment gets them on side, Cialdini advises. “People will want to work with those they feel a sense of rapport with, and are much more willing to give grace to those leaders with whom they feel an emotional connection. Praise where praise is warranted.”



Sign up to the regular Guardian B2B email here for more insight and advice direct to your inbox.

====================================
11: 0.934655
http://www.bbc.com/news/technologyTrump and North Korea talks: The political gamble of the 21st CenturyImage copyright Getty Images Image caption South Korean President Moon Jae-in - dupe or genius?

South Korean leader Moon Jae-in is either a diplomatic genius or a communist set on destroying his country and US President Donald Trump is either a master of brinkmanship or a pawn in a more devious game - depending on who you speak to.

But it is the other actor in this saga, Kim Jong-un, the only one who has yet to make a direct statement, who may just be the most significant player in this most extraordinary of political gambles.

From the moment he extended an apparent olive branch to the South in his new year message to the cordial delegations to Pyeongchang for the Winter Olympics, it became clear that Kim Jong-un had mastered the most sophisticated crafts of propaganda.

Some will view his personal invitation to Mr Trump to hold talks with him - as well as the commitment to freeze further nuclear tests - as the real diplomatic masterstroke after a year that was unprecedented for the level of naked hostility the US and the North bared toward one another.

But the risk here belongs to both Moon Jae-in and Donald Trump. In a situation where neither can claim sole mastery of the narrative, without a clear exit strategy, and when there are so many definitions for both success and failure, a lot is at stake.

Whose charm offensive?

Mr Moon is viewed by his supporters as the negotiator-in-chief who has now skilfully managed to get Mr Kim to at least talk about getting rid of nuclear weapons.

He is the one who spotted the opportunity during the North Korean leader's speech in January - which offered a glimmer of hope that the reclusive state was willing to engage with the South - and grabbed it with both hands.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption The unlikely triangle: Trump, Rodman and Kim Jong-un

The dizzying level of diplomacy and a frenzy of visits between North and South has now delivered - it seems.

"People are calling this the North Korean charm offensive, I actually think this is a South Korean charm offensive. This is something President Moon Jae-in clearly wanted," John Delury from Yonsei University said to me even before the talks were announced.

Mr Moon knew his envoys would have to extract the word "denuclearisation" from Mr Kim when they visited Pyongyang. He also knew having two of his top level government ministers looking cosy with the North Korean leader would not go down well in Washington or Tokyo.

But it was worth the risk. The US would not have considered talking to the communist state without that meeting. His chosen delegates got what they needed.

The South Korean leader is also attempting the role of honest broker, handling Mr Trump and Mr Kim at the same time. He is choosing his words carefully and keeping his cards close to his chest while flattering those who respond to the spotlight.

In his New Year's address he said Mr Trump deserved "huge credit" for talks between the two Koreas, knowing it would please him. He is also using language that will reassure a concerned Republican administration. The language of the South Korean statement announcing the talks was also fulsome in its admiration for Trump's handling of the situation leading up to this moment.

Sanctions will stay in place, Mr Moon had said earlier, and Mr Trump has now confirmed that.

Manipulated by North Korea?

But everybody knows it wasn't always like that. Just six months ago Mr Trump was promising to rain down "fire and fury like the world has never seen" on North Korea if it dare threaten the US. Prof Haksoon Paik, lead researcher at the Sejong Institute, said that threat level felt "totally unprecedented".

"President Moon was very much concerned about nuclear threat of war. Kim Jong-un was in the same situation. We were hearing from the likes of the US Senator Lindsay Graham that lives will be lost over here. Donald Trump's unorthodox and unstable leadership had both Korean leaders worried about the potential of military options."

The US has always maintained that the permanent denuclearisation of North Korea is the endgame. Even with all the surprises up to this point, few believe Mr Kim would agree to that so if they don't achieve that what options does Trump have?

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption South Korean officials held a landmark meeting with Kim Jong-un in Pyongyang this week

So is Moon Jae-in - and indeed Donald Trump - being manipulated by a North Korea which has fooled the world before?

"By dangling before the US once again 'denuclearization of the Korean peninsula' and 'moratorium on nuclear and missile tests', Kim seeks to weaken sanctions, pre-empt US military pre-emption, and condition the world into accepting North Korea as a legitimate nuclear state," says Prof Lee Sung-yoon from the Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy, Tufts University.

For Mr Trump this could be about one of the boldest and most historic moves a US leader has made in foreign relations.

If this gamble works out, Mr Trump could credit himself as the president who sorted out North Korea. His administration has had very few victories, despite promising his voters there would "so much winning."

He believes his "maximum pressure" strategy and his work to get China on side and help squeeze Pyongyang economically is working.

Image copyright Ed Jones/Getty Image caption Protesters in Seoul called for peace talks between the US and North Korea in November

Reporters say he casually mentioned in the White House briefing room that he hoped they would give him credit for Kim Jong-un's offer. His voters certainly will.

But meeting Mr Kim risks treating the communist leader as an equal. It could be a PR disaster. The date set is also only a few months away - a short time frame to achieve diplomatic goals with a leader he mocked as "little rocket man" just a few months ago.

Prof Robert E Kelly at Busan University in South Korea tweeted: "Trump doesn't study or even read. He tends to fly wildly off script. And May means there's almost no time for all the staff prep necessary."

Pyongyang has been playing this game for decades. Mr Trump is new to it. He may see a big win on the horizon, but his Art of the Deal book will not be the guide he needs to deal with Kim Jong-un.

Politics is personal

For Mr Moon this is about history and it is also personal.

He played a part in previous attempts to negotiate with North Korea as chief of staff to President Roh Moo-hyun when he met Mr Kim's father, Kim Jong-il, in 2007. That was the last time the leaders of the two Koreas held a summit. A satellite launch by Pyongyang ended the talks.

By then around $4.5bn of aid had been sent North during the policy of engagement. Critics believe that money helped to accelerate the weapons programme.

Having failed once before, Mr Moon is trying to complete the work he started, says Duyeon Kim, a senior fellow at the Korean Peninsula Forum.

"He's basically following the same playbook as his two liberal predecessors. It's exactly the kind of thing he would want to pick up and continue."

Image copyright Getty Images Image caption The border between the North and South is demarcated at the truce village of Panmunjom

As a son of refugees from the North, Mr Moon is also aware of the effects of conflict on the peninsula. His parents fled North Korea aboard a UN supply ship in 1950 at the start of the Korean War alongside thousands of other refugees.

He told reporters during his election campaign: "My father fled from the North, hating communism. I myself hate the communist North Korean system. That doesn't mean I should let the people in the North suffer under an oppressive regime."

President Moon has acknowledged there are obstacles ahead. He is managing expectations and so much can go wrong.

Duyeon Kim believes there is a high probability that at the end of this negotiating process, all parties will fail, and North Korea will decide it wants to keep its nuclear weapons. And yet...

"You just don't know. I don't think it's ever a lost cause, in spite of all the doubts and scepticism all parties should go in with clear eyes, but negotiate hard."

Image copyright Reuters Image caption North Korea says its long-range missiles protect all of Korea from "US aggressors"

President Moon's approval ratings took a hit during the Winter Olympics after he integrated the women's hockey team with players from the North and met a general from Pyongyang who had been accused of masterminding deadly attacks on South Koreans, though they have since rebounded.

He may suffer politically if this fails but maybe for him, this is not about scoring political points. This is what he told Time magazine last year when he was presidential candidate: "My mother is the only one [of her family] who fled to the South. [She] is 90 years old. Her younger sister is still in the North alive. My mother's last wish is to see her again."

These talks are a huge gamble with a communist state which is hard to read.

But if, just if, he helps pull it off it may reduce the threat of nuclear war and he could win himself a Nobel peace prize.

If all fails, it is back to brinkmanship.

====================================
12: 0.930652
https://www.theguardian.com/us/technologyFred Guttenberg will not sit down: Florida father demands gun reformIn the short time since his daughter Jaime was killed in the Parkland shooting, one dad has devoted himself to change

Fred Guttenberg was at the midpoint of a 15-hour day of advocacy in Washington, and he was refusing to sit down. “No one should feel comfortable talking about the death of my kid,” he told a long line of Senate Democrats. He was standing behind the chair that had been provided for him.

Florida governor signs gun control bill dubbed 'baby step' by students Read more

Three weeks before, his daughter Jaime had been shot to death in her high school hallway. The 14-year-old had been running away from the shooter, her father said, when a bullet severed her spinal cord.

Afterwards, Guttenberg had looked his Republican senator in the eye and told him that his response to the Parkland shooting, and the response of the president of the United States, had been “pathetically weak”. His daughter and her classmates had been hunted in their own school, and politicians needed to admit that guns were the problem and ban military-style assault weapons.

Now, the 52-year-old father was standing in a basement room in the Capitol, where Democrats were hosting an informal hearing for survivors of gun violence. Congressional Republicans had refused to hold a formal hearing.

To Guttenberg’s left were a mother whose daughter had been shot and survived the Virginia Tech massacre more than a decade before, and a mother whose six-year-old son was murdered at Sandy Hook elementary school in 2012. At the time, Barack Obama had embraced Francine Wheeler, promising that this time, after the deaths of 20 small children, the reaction would be different. “It wasn’t different,” Wheeler said.

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Francine Wheeler, mother of Ben Wheeler, six, who was killed in the 2013 Sandy Hook elementary school shooting, on Capitol Hill on Wednesday. Photograph: UPI / Barcroft Images

Florida senator Bill Nelson spoke into his microphone to introduce Fred Guttenberg. “Fred is standing,” he said, “because Fred cannot talk about this sitting down.”

Guttenberg’s older son, Jesse, is more quiet. Jaime had been the loud one, the feisty one, the silly one, the one who never stopped talking because she had so much to say. She was constantly on the phone with her mother. “If my daughter’s shoelace got untied, she would call my wife to tell her about it,” Guttenberg said.

When the shooting happened, Jaime’s older brother called his father even as he was running away, worried that he could not find his sister. “Keep running,” his father told him. The two parents started texting and calling Jaime. No response. At first they guessed she might have dropped her phone. But then, as all the other kids found ways to reach their parents, they heard nothing. They drove to the hospital. She wasn’t there.

Driving home Guttenberg got a call from one of his best friends, a Coral Springs Swat officer, who had been one of the first responders inside the school. His friend told him that they should meet at the Marriott Hotel, where students had been bussed to meet their friends and family.

Guttenberg told his friend said he did not want to wait for news. “I can hear it in your voice,” Guttenberg told him. “And he broke down crying. He found my daughter. He was the one.”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest The scene around Marjory Stoneman Douglas high school in Parkland, Florida following a mass shooting on 14 February 2018. Photograph: Larry Marano/Rex/Shutterstock

His wife was driving in a separate car behind him, and she could tell, just from what she could see of his demeanor in his rearview mirror, that something had changed. She called him on the phone: “You know something.” He wanted to wait to tell her. She would not wait. They pulled over to the side of the road.

“That’s how my wife found out,” Guttenberg said. “At the side of the road.”

“Imagine every worst possibility in your life,” he said, “and that’s what it felt like.”

People grieve very differently. Guttenberg’s wife, who is intensely private, now has to deal not just with losing her child, but to losing her in a particularly horrific and public way. Some parents are like this. Others are like Guttenberg, turning outward, finding their best solace in relentless and articulate rage.

In the wake of so many American mass killings, there have been a series of parents like him: the ones who come out swinging, the ones who seem impossibly strong in the early days of grief. “How can they do it?” people wonder.

A week after his daughter’s murder, Guttenberg confronted his senator on live television without a pause or hesitation. In Washington, he is polite to senators, to staffers, to the people who tell him how brave he is, to the people who tell him they are praying for his family. He seems genuinely grateful for the support. It is important to remember that all of this is a coping mechanism.

“The only time I don’t think about my daughter and just want to cry, to be honest, is when I’m busy doing this,” Guttenberg said. “At least I feel like I’m doing something to honor her memory.”

He was in a back hallway in the Capitol basement, hastily eating a sandwich that a congressional staffer had given him before it was time to testify. Guttenberg would go on to tell the story of his daughter’s murder three different times in less than six hours, choking up most often as he explained that, in the ordinary chaos of sending her off to school on the last day of her life, he could not remember if he had actually told Jaime that he loved her.

He would do most of this on his feet: standing at the hearing, standing for hours that night in front of a packed high school auditorium in Alexandria, Virginia, as a long line of adults and children, some as young as 10 and 11, shared their anger and their fear and their plans for staging walkouts on 14 March to protest about inaction on school shootings. Two Democratic congressman flanked Guttenberg. They had sat, briefly, on the stools provided them, and then stood, because he was standing.

“Three weeks ago, I was just Jesse and Jaime’s dad,” he told the audience of hundreds. “I don’t sit when I discuss this.”



“Every time one of these incidents happens, the conversation afterwards is always way too polite, way too comfortable and way too temporary.”

I’m not going away. This will not be temporary,” he said. “I intend to be part of breaking the gun lobby.”

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Fred Guttenberg at a CNN town hall meeting in Sunrise, Florida, on 21 February 2018. Photograph: Reuters

Pressure on politicians will reach a crescendo later this month when the students of Marjory Stoneman Douglas lead the March For Our Lives in Washington on 24 March. Hundreds of thousands are expected to attend and more than 500 events will be staged across the US and around the world demanding measures to end gun violence and mass shootings.

The activism from his daughter’s Stoneman Douglas classmates, and from kids all over the country, gives Guttenberg hope. Some of the students at TC Williams high school in Virginia were wearing and hanging out orange ribbons, like the one Guttenberg himself wore, a symbol of gun violence prevention, and Jaime’s favorite color.

Earlier in the day, he had spent an hour with Senator Marco Rubio, the Florida Republican whose support of assault weapons he had excoriated on television. He did not think Rubio’s views were changing, but he respected that Rubio had taken the time to meet with him face-to-face.

‘Tipping point’: Americans organizing more than ever after Florida shooting Read more

Guttenberg carries around a screenshot of the latest ad from National Rifle Association spokeswoman Dana Loesch, where she warned the NRA’s opponents, some of them by name, “Your time is running out.”

“If this was put out by a terrorist organization, we would be raising the terror threat level in this country. Why are we letting this lobby having anything to do with DC? I don’t understand it,” Guttenberg told Democratic senators at Wednesday’s hearing, his voice breaking with frustration.

Before the hearing, in the hallway outside the conference room, Guttenberg had been even blunter. “All our legislators who stand with the NRA, they’re standing with a terrorist group,” he said.

Loesch has defended the ad as simply a promo for her new NRA TV show. She wrote on Twitter that it was “unproductive” to call millions of NRA members “terrorists” because “their choice of protecting their families is different from yours”.

While he wants to ban assault weapons like the rifle used to kill his daughter, a ban is not actually Guttenberg’s top priority at the moment. “I don’t think it will ever happen in this environment,” he said. “As much as I would like to see that, I’m interested in taking steps to start dealing with the safety issue in a pragmatic way.”

His current priorities are these: raising the age to buy guns – the shooter, who was 19, had been to buy a military-style rifle before he was legally allowed to have a beer; adding a waiting period before gun sales; ensuring a “truly effective” background check system for gun sales, with no loopholes; banning high-capacity ammunition magazines and bump stocks.

He says guns should be treated more like cars, with mandatory licensing, registration and insurance – a policy that even Democrats like Obama had treated as too extreme to pursue.

Guttenberg said that was ridiculous. “Anyone who says there’s no support for gun legislation that’s as minimal as that should be fired. That’s what I think.”

He is not putting much faith in national politicians’ ability to stand up to the NRA. But corporate America has been “heroic”, with some major corporations ending special discounts for NRA members, and others voluntarily announcing they would raise the age for buying certain guns or resolving to stop selling assault-style rifles.

As Guttenberg spoke to Senate Democrats, Florida’s legislature was in the process of passing its first serious gun control legislation in decades. It was “the bare minimum legislation”, he said, raising age limits for buying guns, creating a waiting period, and banning bump stocks, but the fact that any legislation passed in Florida, a pro-gun state, was a blow to the NRA’s “aura of strength” .



The financial industry is next, Guttenberg hopes. He wanted to see all investment funds “divest themselves of these gun manufacturers and of companies that have relationships with the NRA”.

This is his strategy: “Keep the pressure on the money.”



====================================
13: 0.928361
https://www.reuters.com/news/archive/technologyNewsNot just theater: U.S. officials defend Trump-Kim meetingWASHINGTON (Reuters) - U.S. officials on Sunday defended President Donald Trump’s decision to meet with North Korean leader Kim Jong Un, saying the move was not just for show and not a gift to Pyongyang.

“President Trump isn’t doing this for theater. He’s going to solve a problem,” said Central Intelligence Agency Director Mike Pompeo on the “Fox News Sunday” program.

The United States expects North Korea to halt all nuclear and missile testing in advance of any meeting, Pompeo and Treasury Secretary Steve Mnuchin said on Sunday news shows.

The goal of the meeting remains denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula, something Kim has agreed to discuss, they said. Pompeo said U.S. military exercises in the region would continue in the lead-up to the talks.

The Republican president agreed on Thursday to accept an invitation from the North Korean leader to meet by May after months of escalating tensions over Pyongyang’s advancing nuclear and missile programs.

Trump would become the first sitting U.S. president to meet with a leader of the reclusive country. The two men would face each other after a public volley of insults, with Trump calling Kim “Little Rocket Man” and Kim referring to Trump as a “dotard.”

No venue or date for the meeting has been determined, but Trump’s prompt acceptance set off a flurry of activity.The South Korean officials who carried Kim’s invitation to Washington will split up to visit the leaders of China and Japan this week to update them on the talks, a South Korean presidential official said on Sunday.

China, North Korea’s main ally, has encouraged dialogue over Pyongyang’s nuclear program, and its state media on Saturday credited Beijing for helping ease tensions.

“China continues to be helpful!” Trump tweeted on Saturday.

North Korea’s leaders have sought a face-to-face meeting with a U.S. president for decades, but have been rebuffed over human rights concerns as well as the nuclear ambitions.

U.S. student Otto Warmbier died last summer shortly after his release from a 17-month detention. Three Americans remain detained in North Korea.

FILE PHOTO - A combination photo shows a Korean Central News Agency (KCNA) handout of Kim Jong Un released on May 10, 2016, and Donald Trump posing for a photo in New York City, U.S., May 17, 2016. REUTERS/KCNA handout via Reuters/File Photo & REUTERS/Lucas Jackson/File Photo

Many Democrats as well as Trump’s fellow Republicans said the United States should have demanded concessions before granting North Korea a meeting.

“Before they get that kind of prize, we should insist that they make some real changes, verifiable changes to their programs,” Democratic U.S. Senator Elizabeth Warren said on NBC’s “Meet the Press.”

Warren said she was worried the North would “take advantage” of Trump.

“EYES WIDE OPEN”

Pompeo and Mnuchin said the United States would make no concessions and would keep the pressure on North Korea by maintaining economic sanctions and a strong U.S. defense posture before the meeting. They also dismissed criticism that Trump’s decision to meet elevated the North Korean leader on an international stage.

“This administration has its eyes wide open, and the whole time this conversation takes place the pressure will continue to mount on North Korea,” Pompeo said on CBS’ “Face the Nation.”

The United States slapped sanctions on individuals and groups in North Korea in October over “flagrant” human rights abuses and added sanctions in February.

Six Republican senators last week sent a letter asking Trump to share his plan to keep up pressure on “this heinous regime.”

One of them, Republican Cory Gardner, told CBS on Sunday it was important to see concrete steps from North Korea before the meeting. “After this meeting, there’s going to be very little left of that diplomatic runway,” he said.

Mnuchin addressed criticism that Trump has not used more diplomacy to contain Pyongyang’s nuclear ambitions. “So the president is going to sit down and see if he can cut a deal,” he said on NBC’s “Meet the Press.”

The prospect of doing something no American president has done - especially on such an intractable geopolitical problem - was irresistible to Trump, Eurasia Group President Ian Bremmer said on CNN’s “Fareed Zakaria GPS.”

“So it’s the first. It’s incredible television. Clearly Trump wants to make this happen,” Bremmer said. “But that doesn’t mean it’s going to happen.”

====================================
14: 0.927633
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyTrump to Make First Visit as President to Latin AmericaPhoto

President Trump will make the first visit of his presidency to Latin America next month, the White House said on Saturday, traveling to Peru for a summit meeting of Western Hemisphere nations where he will convene with a group of leaders who have criticized his statements and policies on immigration.

The president will also visit Colombia and meet with President Juan Manuel Santos, the White House said in a statement.

“This travel demonstrates the president’s resolve to deepen our historical ties with our partners in the region and to strengthen our joint commitment to improve security and prosperity for the people of the Americas,” the statement said.

The statement pointed to the significance of establishing relationships with countries that “share our values and believe that the promise of a safe and prosperous future rests in strong democracies, fair and reciprocal trade, and secure borders.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As he has moved the United States toward a more protectionist stance on trade, Mr. Trump has abandoned the Trans-Pacific Partnership, which includes Mexico, Peru and Chile. The United States is also engaged in difficult negotiations with Mexico and Canada over changes to the North American Free Trade Agreement.

====================================
15: 0.926968
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyTrump’s Warning Shot on Trade Risks Igniting a Wider Conflict“The level of tension between the United States and its major trading partners is probably more tense than it has been at any time since the early 1980s,” said Meredith Crowley, an international trade expert at the University of Cambridge in England.

Whether Mr. Trump has begun a trade war or merely a skirmish will depend on what happens next — which countries win a reprieve from the tariffs, and which opt to retaliate.

Mr. Trump’s decision to back off from across-the-board tariffs came in the face of strident warnings from the American business world and leaders of his own Republican Party that such a course would damage the American economy and alienate allies.

Still, Mr. Trump brushed aside talk that tariffs were a reckless provocation, appearing to relish his role as instigator. “Trade wars are good and easy to win,” he tweeted this month.

Mr. Trump maintains that Americans have been outwitted by savvier trading partners, with tariffs needed to force jobs to return to the United States.

History has proved humbling for those inclined to seek victory through trade conflicts. Commerce has tended to plunge, with the working class suffering lost jobs and diminished livelihoods. Alliances have been frayed, heightening international tensions.

Many economists and international-relations experts assume that Mr. Trump’s tariffs could play out much the same way, isolating the United States while imperiling a global economic expansion.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Not least, the tariffs seem likely to present the World Trade Organization with a potentially existential crisis.

Photo

The organization has been described as the referee for global commerce, settling disputes on the basis of rules adopted by consensus among its 164 members. Now, the referee may be on the verge of losing control of the game.

In justifying its tariffs as a response to a supposed threat to national security — a contention that has drawn derision from economists — the Trump administration has virtually ensured a challenge from the European Union via a complaint filed with the trade organization. That would put the institution in a predicament in which any course risks undermining its authority.

The trade organization could rule in favor of the United States, deferring to American sovereignty and its right to determine its national security policies. But that would hand every country on earth a template to break with the norms of international trade.

“This would open the floodgates to everyone bringing in broad exceptions,” said Ms. Crowley, the Cambridge expert.

Or the body could rule against the United States, rejecting the argument that metal forged in Europe poses a mortal peril to Americans. The Trump administration might then ignore the ruling and carry on, forcing the W.T.O. to give countries the right to retaliate.

Hostilities would most likely expand well beyond steel and aluminum. Mr. Trump’s pledge of tariffs has enraged and astounded American allies whose fortunes are tied to producing these metals, like Japan, South Korea, Germany and Taiwan.

On Wednesday, the European Union outlined plans to retaliate with tariffs on a variety of American goods, including motorcycles, rice and bourbon. If reprisals continued, Europe might limit exports of other American agricultural products, intensifying its push against genetically modified crops. In the most extreme case, Europe might even impede American investment.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“It’s a real chance that everyone reacts very negatively,” said Jennifer A. Hillman, an international trade expert at Georgetown Law Center in Washington.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Faced with a rebuke from the global trading body, Mr. Trump might pull the United States out of the institution.

As he addressed a delegation at the trading body’s Geneva headquarters on Monday, W.T.O.’s director general, Roberto Azevêdo, worried openly about a descent into a trade war.

“It is clear that we now see a much higher and real risk of triggering an escalation of trade barriers across the globe,” he said. “Once we start down this path, it will be very difficult to reverse direction. An eye for an eye will leave us all blind and the world in deep recession.”

Trade frictions are a constant in the global economy. Governments wield tariffs, import quotas and other instruments to protect sensitive industries. But a trade war is different, holding the potential to damage living standards on multiple continents.

“You start viewing it as a conflict between nations,” said Adam S. Posen, president of the Peterson Institute for International Economics, a research institution in Washington. “You put a premium on doing damage rather than deterring bad behavior.”

Photo

Mr. Trump and his advisers appear to be calculating that, as the largest economy on earth, the United States possesses enough muscle to dictate the terms of world trade.

“They are under the delusion that the United States has been screwed by the global system that it created,” Mr. Posen said. “They apparently think that everyone else will fold if they stand up.”

That idea, he added, is about to be exposed as wrong.

As the United States grappled with the Great Depression, a Republican-controlled Congress seized on protectionism as the fix, adopting the infamous Smoot-Hawley Tariff Act of 1930 to wall off American farms and factories from foreign competition.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The law sharply increased tariffs on hundreds of goods — from sugar to shoes to iron. American trading partners responded with their own tariffs, and commerce deteriorated, deepening the depression.

After Democrats captured control of Congress and the White House in 1932, tariffs fell sharply, bolstering American trade. But Britain, France, Germany and other European powers maintained steep tariffs. Trade disintegrated, exacerbating nationalist animosities that exploded into World War II.

The last substantial outbreak of trade hostilities played out in the 1980s, as the United States grappled with the consequences of a rising Japan. The American auto industry — caught unprepared for the public’s embrace of smaller, more fuel-efficient vehicles — lobbied Washington for tariffs to limit a surge of Japanese imports. President Ronald Reagan ultimately pressured Japan to voluntarily restrict auto exports to the United States.

Japanese-made automobiles sold in the United States soared in price. Seeking to avoid tariffs while improving trust, Japanese car companies began setting up plants to make their vehicles in the United States, employing American workers.

Trade advisers to Mr. Trump cite this history as an example of how an aggressive stance can set up fruitful trade negotiations. But major differences separate that episode from today.

Back in the 1980s, auto plants needed to be built somewhere to serve swelling American demand for small cars. Japan was firmly dependent on good relations with Washington for its security, making it prone to avoid conflict.

Today’s primary American trade antagonist is China, ruled by the apparent president-for-life Xi Jinping, whose nationalist credo does not leave room for caving to pressure from Washington. The world faces a glut of steel, much of it made in China. Whatever tariffs the Trump administration maintains, foreign steel manufacturers are not likely to construct new plants in the United States.

Among proponents of liberalized trade, the most hopeful history may be the most recent chapter.

In 2002, President George W. Bush put tariffs on steel to protect American producers against imports. Then, as now, companies that make products using steel vastly outnumbered those that produce the metal. As automakers and other steel buyers confronted higher costs, the tariffs eliminated some 200,000 jobs, according to one study.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Foreign steel producers filed a challenge at the W.T.O., which ruled that the United States had acted without justification. Europe prepared a list of American goods to stick with retaliatory tariffs. Mr. Bush backed down.

But if the global trading apparatus successfully defused that crisis, the current situation presents a different challenge given the nature of the commander waging the attack.

“The fundamental view of this administration seems to be, somewhat bizarrely, that the United States has not benefited from trade,” Ms. Crowley said. “It seems like it’s not really registering how damaging this could be.”

====================================
16: 0.92452
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyTrump’s Unpredictability on Trade and North Korea Opens a Door for China“The abrupt decision on steel tariffs and now the summit with Kim Jong-un will inevitably raise questions in Tokyo and other allied capitals about how decisions are made by this administration that affect their interests,” said Michael J. Green, a former Asia adviser to President George W. Bush who is now at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington, and who met with Japanese officials in Tokyo on Friday.

The news that Mr. Trump wanted to meet with Mr. Kim did provide relief, at least in the short term, from months of growing fears that military conflict would break out on the Korean Peninsula.

“On the one hand, we’re buying time and Trump is not going to bomb in the spring,” said Gordon Flake, chief executive of the Perth US-Asia Center at the University of Western Australia. “That’s good.”

But, Mr. Flake added, Mr. Trump “demonstrated extreme capriciousness on something like tariffs. This is why everyone in the region is having the same reaction: equal parts relief and alarm.”

Mr. Trump’s seemingly unstoppable series of erratic moves has helped cast China as the more stable power in Asia. But it has also diverted attention from Chinese actions that would otherwise have raised much more alarm.

Photo

“One of the most underreported consequences of the last 18 months is that China has gotten a free pass,” said Mr. Flake, citing the country’s military buildup on islands in the South China Sea, its economic punishment of South Korea for cooperating with the United States on a missile defense system and, most recently, President Xi Jinping’s power grab, persuading the Communist Party to abolish limits on his time in office.

Under any other American administration, “the dominant narrative would have been Chinese overreach and internal crackdowns,” Mr. Flake said. “But that narrative has been completely washed away by the chaos that is Trump.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The most recent announcements out of Washington, particularly the tariffs, could hurt China. Clearly, a trade war would be painful. And as Mr. Trump plans his meeting with Mr. Kim, Beijing is forced to sit on the sidelines awaiting the result.

“The downside risk for them is that they are not in the room,” said Mira Rapp-Hooper, a scholar of Asian security issues at Yale Law School. “Being completely cut out of a genuine relationship between the U.S. and North Korea is not in their interest.”

Still, lengthy talks between the United States and North Korea, even if they do not produce an agreement, would serve to delay some unpalatable decisions for China, analysts said.

North Korea has become increasingly disgruntled with China since Mr. Kim took charge, particularly as Beijing has backed economic sanctions against it. That has complicated China’s efforts to diminish American influence in the region.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“China wants the nukes removed, but not at too high a geostrategic cost, in the form of North Korea becoming China’s permanent enemy or falling into enormous domestic chaos or sliding into the American fold,” said Shi Yinhong, a professor of international relations at Renmin University in Beijing.

From China’s perspective, the Trump-Kim talks, by cooling the bellicose rhetoric between the United States and North Korea, would reduce the need for intense cooperation between the United States, Japan and South Korea.

“It suits China’s long-term strategic interest perfectly, because what they don’t want to see is pressure on North Korea leading to the strengthening of American alliances,” said Mr. Green. “China’s strategy is to start pulling apart those alliances incrementally.”

Increasingly, Asian allies that once viewed the United States as an anchoring force in the region now worry about being played off against each other. Japan and South Korea in particular, whose relations have recently deteriorated over longstanding historical disputes, find themselves jockeying for Washington’s favor.

Photo

In Japan, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe has worked hard to cultivate a warm relationship with Mr. Trump. So even as Mr. Trump withdrew from the Trans-Pacific Partnership, a multilateral trade deal centered in Asia, and imposed the new steel and aluminum tariffs, government officials have tempered their criticism.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Japan and the United States are allies, so the Japanese government doesn’t want to be too negative towards the Trump government,” said Kazuhiro Maeshima, a professor of politics at Sophia University in Tokyo.

South Korea, meanwhile, lobbied for an exemption to the tariffs, citing the importance of the alliance. The envoys who visited the White House to brief Mr. Trump on their meeting with Mr. Kim made personal appeals to Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and the national security adviser, Gen. H.R. McMaster, on the tariff issue, according to Kim Eui-kyeom, a spokesman for President Moon Jae-in.

The tariffs prompted harsh words in some South Korean news outlets for the leader of the country’s most important ally. “His style of governing, marked by disconnectedness and arrogance, is just mind-blowing,” a liberal daily newspaper, Hankyoreh, said in a Saturday editorial.

For Asian allies, perhaps the most difficult task in dealing with Mr. Trump — one that is hardly unique to foreign governments — is scrambling to discern his true intentions.

Mr. Trump often “is saying one thing in Japan and another thing in Seoul,” said Yoshiki Mine, a former Japanese Foreign Ministry official who was involved in past talks between Japan and North Korea, and who now runs a think tank, the Institute of Peaceful Diplomacy.

Mr. Moon, after being sidelined by Washington in its approach to North Korea a few months ago, would now seem to be in favor, having effectively brokered Mr. Kim’s invitation to Mr. Trump. But analysts warned that the talks could go in directions South Korea might not welcome.

“We quickly get to the question of what is going to be talked about here,” said Ms. Rapp-Hooper. “Kim Jong-un is clearly not ready to give up his nuclear weapons. If it gets to that, he will make extreme security demands, not only a security guarantee, but demanding that we end our alliance with South Korea and withdraw our troops from the peninsula.”

If Mr. Trump offered to significantly reduce America’s presence in South Korea in exchange for limits on the North’s nuclear program, it would be a setback for South Korea and Japan and a long-term win for China.

American allies in the region, along with many developing countries in Southeast Asia, want the United States to maintain a strong presence, as much to counterbalance China as to promote democratic values, said Kristi Govella, an assistant professor of Asian studies at the University of Hawaii at Manoa.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Most countries would prefer not to be dominated by anybody — whether it is the U.S. or China or Japan,” Ms. Govella said. “Especially for the smaller countries, they want to hedge a bit and have different options, and not be subject to the will of any particular country.”

====================================
17: 0.923062
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyClinton Impeachment Lawyer May Aid Trump in Mueller ResponseMr. Cobb’s primary task — producing documents for Mr. Mueller and arranging for White House aides to meet with prosecutors — is largely complete. Mr. Trump’s personal lawyers have been handling negotiations with Mr. Mueller over the terms of a presidential interview.

Mr. Flood had been on the wish list of some of the president’s advisers to join his legal team last year, and he is the only person the White House has been in contact with about such a leading role.

White House officials did not immediately respond to a request for comment. Mr. Flood declined to comment.

This is not the first time that the president’s advisers have considered a job for Mr. Flood, who worked in the White House counsel’s office under George W. Bush and represented Vice President Dick Cheney.

As recently as the summer, Mr. Flood, who currently works at the law firm Williams & Connolly, turned down an opportunity to represent Mr. Trump. It is not clear what has changed since then.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

People close to Mr. Trump have long praised Mr. Cobb as having a deft touch with an often mercurial president. Throughout last year, Mr. Cobb kept Mr. Trump from publicly airing grievances against Mr. Mueller in part by telling him that the investigation would be wrapped up by December, or soon after — an assessment that proved too optimistic.

But there have been signs in recent months that Mr. Trump may be looking to shake up his legal team and change his approach to Mr. Mueller’s investigation. The president has polled his advisers and friends, asking them what they think of Mr. Cobb, who persuaded Mr. Trump to take a cooperative approach to the inquiry.

In private conversations, Mr. Trump has seesawed between expressing confidence in Mr. Cobb’s claim that the inquiry will wrap up in relatively short order and that he will be exonerated, and sounding frustrated with his team’s legal strategy.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Cobb has clashed with the White House counsel, Donald F. McGahn II, who believed that Mr. Cobb was too willing to hand over documents to Mr. Mueller when the White House could have shielded them by citing executive or attorney-client privilege. Officials familiar with the discussions with Mr. Flood said they were unrelated to tensions between Mr. McGahn and Mr. Cobb.

It is not clear what a shake-up would mean for John Dowd and Jay Sekulow, the two lawyers outside the White House who have also represented Mr. Trump since the summer. Mr. Dowd has been at the center of a string of embarrassing incidents, including one in which he wrote a tweet for Mr. Trump that raised new questions about whether the president had tried to obstruct the investigation into his former national security adviser, Michael T. Flynn.

One person close to the president who has urged him to dismiss Mr. Cobb and Mr. Dowd has been the Fox News personality Jeanine Pirro. Ms. Pirro, a personal friend of Mr. Trump’s and a former Westchester County district attorney, told Mr. Trump in an Oval Office visit months ago that Mr. Cobb and Mr. Dowd were leading him down a path toward his demise.

Other advisers have urged the president to make Marc E. Kasowitz, his longtime New York lawyer, with whom he had a falling out months ago, his lead lawyer again. Since Mr. Kasowitz has receded from the lead role, the president’s legal team has been composed of a crew of free agents, such as Mr. Cobb.

Through intermediaries, Mr. Trump’s advisers have reached out to prominent lawyers to feel out their interest in joining his legal team. Most have expressed no interest.

====================================
18: 0.917837
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyAfter Demanding Local Control, DeVos Finds That It Limits Her InfluenceIt was the first time that Ms. DeVos has offered her opinions on the quality of state plans under the new law, which freed states from the punitive and prescriptive federal mandates of the George W. Bush-era No Child Left Behind Act.

But what Ms. DeVos called “tough love” policy experts and observers called the ultimate display of a frustrated federalist. The address, they said, is an example of a self-described education reformer wrestling with the limits of her influence in an agency whose power she wants to curtail.

“I think she’s having an identity problem,” said Sandy Kress, who served as senior education adviser to Mr. Bush on the No Child Left Behind Act.

Mr. Kress noted that Ms. DeVos had been critical of her predecessors, calling Mr. Bush’s education law a “stick,” and Barack Obama’s Race to the Top policy, which incentivized state reform with cash, a “carrot.” But he noted that she had not identified any tool that she would use to effect change in the nation’s schools.

“Being a federalist does not exclude you from the role of leadership,” Mr. Kress said. “She needs to stand for something, rather than showing up at a place like a regular citizen opining on things.”

Michael J. Petrilli, president of the Thomas B. Fordham Institute, said he believed that not since the administration of the elder George Bush has an education secretary been a true federalist. That education secretary was Lamar Alexander of Tennessee, who is now a senator. As the chief architect of ESSA, he ensured the “local control” components of the bill.

George W. Bush’s administration was so aggressive in driving education policy that Mr. Bush reset the expectation of conservative leadership in the department, Mr. Petrilli said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“We’ve been conditioned for the last 30 years to expect a secretary of education to be out front on education reform, using various federal levers,” he said. “Betsy DeVos is trying to lead from behind.”

Ms. DeVos’s criticism of the state plans echoed that of several groups that say her office’s implementation of ESSA has been too lax.

Democrats and civil rights groups say Ms. DeVos has approved state education plans that do not properly measure the performance of minority students, an allegation she denies. But in her speech, she mentioned the fact that several governors, the majority of them Republican, had refused to sign the plans their states submitted to her office because of what they saw as lackluster achievement goals.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

“Just because a plan complies with the law doesn’t mean it does what’s best for students,” Ms. DeVos told the chiefs. “Whatever the reasons, I see too many plans that only meet the bare minimum required by the law. Sure, they may pass muster around conference tables in Washington, but the bare minimum won’t pass muster around kitchen tables.”

Education chiefs bristled at Ms. DeVos’s assessments, which they saw as painting them with too broad a brush.

“All states are doing far more than Sec. DeVos recognized,” tweeted Matthew Blomstedt, the education commissioner in Nebraska, a state whose governor refused to sign its ESSA plan. “She delivered a ‘tough love’ speech that demonstrated why the USDOE is out of touch with the good things actually happening in states and schools.”

Policy experts agreed with the substance of the speech, but said it was too little, too late.

“She should look in the mirror,” said Chad Aldeman, a principal at Bellwether Education Partners, a consulting firm that led a group of policy experts in an independent review of plans last year. “There were several points in time she could have shared her concerns and improved plans.”

All plans have been submitted, and 35 have been approved. In announcing the batches of approvals, Ms. DeVos noted only that they complied with the law.

Ms. DeVos had signaled unwavering support for the autonomy under the ESSA law, and even issued a pared-down template for states to complete following a vote by Congress last year to rescind regulations that specified accountability measures in the law. But since then, she has not used much of her power over budgets, guidance documents or even a public relations campaign to promote opportunities for innovation and specificity under ESSA, critics say.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“She lowered the bar, they met it, and now she seems frustrated by that,” Mr. Aldeman said.

Ms. DeVos told state chiefs that they met the lowest bar — compliance — and that many plans fell short of furthering ESSA’s primary goals of innovation in educational programming to lift student achievement, as well as increasing transparency about school performance.

For example, she said, only two states, Louisiana and New Mexico, opted into a program that allowed them to use millions in otherwise restricted federal dollars to provide new educational programs, like online courses, for struggling schools.

She also said that some states “proposed accountability schemes that were so complicated, schools would be accountable to no one.” In one case, she said, a state “took a simple concept like a color-coded dashboard and managed to make it nearly indecipherable.”

In her speech, Ms. DeVos praised “bright spots,” like Nevada, whose state education chief, Steve Canavero, said he was encouraged by the speech.

“The core message I heard is a message that I continue to hear from the other folks who are in the bleachers of the education space: You have to continually think about ways to innovate, and think about ways to best serve kids,” Mr. Canavero said.

Ms. DeVos reiterated that she would not fall into “the trap of a top-down approach” of her predecessors.

“The Department of Education doesn’t write laws, it implements them,” she said. “Congress did its job. We’re doing ours. And now, you get to do yours.”

====================================
19: 0.915487
http://www.bbc.com/news/technologyTrump Kim talks: The tricky task of preparing for the summitImage copyright AFP Image caption How do you get ready for unprecedented meeting between two wildly unpredictable men. And is there time?

Back in September, North Korean leader Kim Jong-un vowed to "tame" Donald Trump, deriding the president as a "mentally deranged US dotard".

President Trump replied by calling Mr Kim a "maniac" and a "madman", and warning he would be "tested like never before". Later they traded barbs over who had a bigger nuclear button.

Six months on, those high-stakes playground spats are part of a bizarre diplomatic backdrop to a summit no-one saw coming. Mr Trump surprised the world on Thursday when he announced, via a South Korean official, that he had agreed to meet Mr Kim.

The major negotiating point of their meeting will be de-nuclearisation of the North Korean regime. Beyond that, little is yet known about potential objectives and concessions on either side.

It is a remarkable gamble by the US president, one that would make him the first American leader to meet a North Korean counterpart. The careful choreography and delicate diplomacy required by international talks have not always come naturally to the Trump team, and now its staff have on their hands one of the most high-profile bilateral summits in US history.

The talks are scheduled to take place within two months. For both sides, preparation will be key, but how do you prepare for an unprecedented meeting between two wildly unpredictable men?

Get some staff in

The US will begin with key Korea positions in the state department vacant. Chief North Korea envoy Joseph Yun resigned in February and the widely expected appointment of Victor Cha as ambassador to Seoul fell through the same month, over a policy disagreement.

"I expect they are going to face a few problems," said Jim Hoare, a former British charge d'affaires in Pyongyang, of the American effort.

"If they had a proper apparatus to deal with East Asia, it might be different. But they have only an acting officer in charge of East Asian matters, the state department has been battered and there's no ambassador in South Korea. So I don't know who Trump is talking to about North Korea, I'm not sure anybody does."

The decision to agree to the historic meeting is said to have unfolded in an impulsive and haphazard way not uncommon to the new administration. The New York Times reports that the president, upon hearing that South Korean official Chung Eui-yong was in the White House, summoned Mr Chung to the Oval office and asked about Mr Kim.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption The South's Chung Eui-yong talks to reporters at the White House

When Mr Chung said the North Korean leader wanted to meet Mr Trump, the president immediately agreed and told the South Korean official to make the announcement to the press.

Not for the first time, Mr Trump's own Secretary of State, Rex Tillerson, was caught on the hop. "In terms of direct talks... we're a long ways from negotiations," Mr Tillerson had told reporters just hours before the surprise announcement.

Previous presidents have resisted visiting North Korea, leery of conferring prestige on the regime. Bill Clinton reportedly considered a trip to Pyongyang in late 2000, shortly after a visit by then-Secretary of State Madeleine Albright had laid potential groundwork, but ultimately focused on late-term priorities elsewhere.

Media playback is unsupported on your device Media caption The unlikely triangle: Trump, Rodman and Kim Jong-un

"A meeting with the US president is the coin of the realm," said Christopher Hill, a former US ambassador to South Korea, "and here we have a president just prepared to do it without too many details of what the North Koreans have in mind."

But the president's oft-derided impulsiveness may prove to be an asset in this case, said Stephen Hadley, a former national security adviser to George W Bush.

"His style has already produced a breakthrough," said Mr Hadley.

"He was much criticised for rhetoric on North Korea that was viewed as irresponsible and bellicose but it got both North Korea's attention and China's attention.

"The trick now is to convince China that the status quo is not sustainable and convince North Korea that holding on to nuclear weapons might be more of a risk to their security than giving them up.

"And I think Trump's approach has had a pretty good impact in both of those directions already."

Pick the right place

The speed of the decision leaves significant details up in the air. The location presents an interesting conundrum. Mr Kim has not left North Korea since becoming leader and is unlikely to accept an invitation to Washington. A visit by Mr Trump to Pyongyang would be a considerable PR gift to the North Koreans and is equally unlikely.

"It's going to be difficult getting the protocol right, who defers to who and under what circumstances etc, so it's important to find a place that's neutral," said Mr Hoare.

Possible contenders include China, the demilitarised zone between the two Koreas and somewhere in international waters. In 1989, George HW Bush met the Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev, on a Soviet cruise ship off the coast of Malta.

More important still than the location for Mr Trump will be a meticulous understanding of both the US and North Korean objectives. For a president known to struggle with dense briefing papers - preferring instead short, image-led presentations - preparation could be a challenge.

"If he doesn't do the homework he's going to have a problem," said Mr Hoare. "He will be facing people who have been working on US matters for years and years and years. They won't speak but they will have briefed Mr Kim very thoroughly."

Another key consideration will be the way things look. The summit will take place in a media ecosystem completely different to that of 1961, when President John Kennedy met Nikita Khrushchev in Vienna, or of 1972 when Richard Nixon made his famous overture to China. Every word will be covered in real time on cable news, every stray bit of body language subjected to rigorous analysis.

But if Mr Trump can avoid diplomatic gaffes and get along well enough with Mr Kim, his straight-shooting style of politics may prove to be as much of an asset in dealing with North Korea as it has been a liability elsewhere.

"He has already surprised a lot of people by bringing Kim to the table," said Mr Hadley. "It just might be that his unconventional style produces a surprising result from the meeting."

====================================
20: 0.914239
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyOut of Public View, Trumps and Kushners Are Talking Business“The concern is that the president might not want to do anything that would upset the Kushner family agreement to do business with his company,” said Marilyn L. Glynn, who served as general counsel in the Office of Government Ethics during Republican and Democratic administrations, when told by The New York Times about the Trump-Kushner talks.

The White House declined to comment. Both companies on Friday confirmed their discussions about the hotel in Pier Village, while dismissing ethics concerns.

The plans under discussion in Long Branch have called for the Kushners to own the hotel and make payments to the Trump Organization to run it. The bonds issued by the city, part of a broader renewal effort, are not earmarked for the hotel, but they will support public infrastructure around Pier Village, and in turn help the hotel and nearby properties succeed.

Photo

Last year, in another previously unreported endeavor involving the two family businesses, the Trump Organization began managing a Kushner-owned hotel in Livingston, N.J., people briefed on the matter said. That property, the Westminster Hotel, is believed to be the only hotel that the Trumps manage but do not brand.

The behind-the-scenes activity signals a deepening of the Trump-Kushner business relationship, which until recently appeared to be limited to a single residential project in Jersey City. It also poses potential ethical headaches for the White House, Ms. Glynn and other legal experts say.

Deals between the two families, said Ms. Glynn, who also served as acting director of the ethics office for part of George W. Bush’s presidency, do not inherently violate any ethics rule. But, weighing whether new financial entanglements posed more of a problem than existing family ones, she added, “I think the financial concerns trump the familial ones, so to speak.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Walter M. Shaub Jr., who led the ethics office under President Barack Obama and is a frequent critic of Mr. Trump, said: “If a subordinate is your son-in-law, maybe you like them, but once you have entangled business interests, they’ve got leverage over you. Blood is not thicker than money for a lot of people.”

In a statement, the Kushner Companies said the Trumps “have zero equity of any type in our properties or businesses.” In Long Branch, the statement said, “we are contemplating a third-party operator agreement with their hotel management division at market rate.” Noting that it did not specialize in the hospitality industry, the company said it had “a business obligation to seek the most capable resource.”

In an interview, Eric Danziger, the head of Trump Hotels, disputed that teaming up with the Kushners might pose a conflict.

“This is a straight-up business deal,” he said. “If there were something out of the ordinary about the deal, then I think that question is fair,” he said, but “we do market transactions that are reviewed and checked.”

Mr. Danziger said that Bobby Burchfield, the Trump Organization’s outside ethics adviser, had asked about the financing involved in a potential Long Branch deal with the Kushners. Mr. Burchfield, who scrutinizes how the Trump Organization’s partners finance deals, among other things, often requires more information before approving a deal.

Whether or not the Trumps and Kushners reach a deal, Mr. Kushner stands to gain. He is expected to eventually own 20 percent of the hotel in Pier Village, according to documents obtained through a public records request. And he was personally involved in the project early in the presidential campaign. In documents provided to Long Branch, the Kushner Companies stated that Mr. Kushner “is strictly a passive investor.”

He also retains a stake in a Kushner residential tower in Jersey City that bears the Trump name.

In Livingston, Mr. Kushner has divested from the Westminster Hotel, a three-story property overlooking strip malls. While it is unusual for the Trumps to manage hotels that do not carry one of their brands, Mr. Danziger said he was discussing similar deals with other companies as a way to expand the business under the “right circumstances.”

“An owner wants to know they can depend on and rely on the operator, and we have a lot of credibility as operators,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The growing relationship between the families could be helpful to the Trumps, as the ethical restraints they voluntarily adopted after the election have proved to be a hindrance to new business. The Trump Organization, which agreed not to start any new foreign projects during the presidency, has yet to open a new hotel in the United States since Mr. Trump took office.

While Mr. Danziger said the pipeline of potential deals was “still very active,” the company has also shown some signs of scaling back: Since the election, the Trump name has been removed from properties in Manhattan, Toronto and Panama.

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

A pairing with the Kushners could bring other complications. If the Trumps manage a Kushner property that received foreign or domestic government funding, it could test the Constitution’s emoluments clauses, which essentially prohibit the president from accepting certain gifts from foreign or domestic governments. Some legal experts argue that local bonds like the ones issued in Long Branch could brush against the domestic clause.

The Kushners, who co-own the development with Extell Development, a New York real estate firm, said they would not accept money from foreign governments.

The firm, however, has a history of seeking cash from investors with strong connections to foreign governments, including Anbang, an insurance company in China.

The Kushners also have a history of teaming up with Israeli investors, which is ethically thorny for Mr. Kushner, whose central responsibilities in the White House include handling Middle East policy. Extell’s bonds have traded on the Tel Aviv stock exchange.

The Kushners also used money from Chinese investors to finance the construction of Trump Bay Street, the residential tower in Jersey City. The Chinese money came through the so-called EB-5 program, which offers visas to foreigners in exchange for $500,000 investments in real estate projects. Federal prosecutors have been investigating the Kushner businesses’ use of the program, though the company has said it no longer pursues this type of funding and “did nothing improper.”

In addition, investigators working for Robert S. Mueller III, the special counsel looking into Russian interference in the 2016 election, have asked questions about Mr. Kushner’s interactions with foreign businesspeople, according to a person with knowledge of the matter.

In Long Branch, the Kushners are moving ahead with building the hotel in Pier Village and may add more hotels in the area.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The talks with the Trumps have focused largely on the Pier Village property under construction, which might carry the Scion brand, a new line of four-star hotels the Trumps announced in 2016. The Kushner Companies, however, said on Friday that it planned only to have the Trumps manage the hotel.

The hotel construction is part of the latest phase of a decades-long effort to remake the Long Branch waterfront after a fire destroyed the boardwalk in 1987 and contributed to a downward spiral.

Mayor Adam Schneider and local business leaders spearheaded a redevelopment plan in the 1990s that gave rise to Pier Village. The effort increased the city’s annual beachfront revenue from $200,000 in the early 1990s to more than $2 million in 2017, the mayor said.

Photo

The Kushners have long owned an oceanfront house in an exclusive section of town, and in 2014, they teamed up with Extell to buy Pier Village.

With the purchase, the Kushners took over the part of Pier Village that already had a row of restaurants and shops, as well as a vacant strip of land that will eventually feature luxury residential condominiums, retail stores and the hotel.

Mr. Kushner was involved in planning the project. He was copied on emails with city officials, and the mayor recalls meeting with him twice.

Mr. Kushner assumed a role in the White House, but his sister, Nicole Meyer, and his father, Charles Kushner, continued to work on the effort, including discussions with officials about the bonds.

In September, the City Council unanimously approved the bonds to help close a “funding gap.” The city will borrow the money to reimburse Kushner Companies and Extell for approved costs that arise from building public improvements such as a boardwalk, public restrooms and a children’s play area.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Schneider said that the arrangement would not cause a tax increase, and that the city had struck a better deal with the Kushners and Extell than with the previous owners of Pier Village.

The city expects to more than recoup its investment by collecting an annual service charge and other payments that the Kushners and Extell pay in lieu of certain taxes. And the city said it had obtained a personal guarantee from Charles Kushner.

“It’s actually a very lucrative deal to municipalities,” Mr. Schneider said.

A week after the city approved the bonds, emails show, Ms. Meyer invited local officials to lunch at the Beach House restaurant at Pier Village. “Please let us know if you would like to join,” the invitation said, “and thank you for all your support and efforts!”

When informed by reporters that the Trump Organization might ultimately be involved in a hotel in his town, Mr. Schneider, a Democrat first elected in 1990, sighed and expressed concern.

But he added: “Our success is that we have a hotel that’s doing a great volume of business that’s creating jobs and economic vitality. It can be achieved no matter what name is on any building.”

====================================
21: 0.912534
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyBeauty, Pride and Power in Photos by Lola FlashAdvertisement

lens Beauty, Pride and Power in Photos by Lola Flash Image Raven O., from the “Legends” series, featuring portraits of people who have spearheaded L.G.B.T.Q. movements. Credit Lola Flash

To experience Lola Flash’s portraits is to come face to face, eye to eye, with a subject who will not stay on the margins or in the shadows. From classic portraits of accomplished older women and rich-hued photos of cultural trendsetters to portraits of people who question gradations of skin color or gender roles, her images are hardly mute. They are strong, dignified, happy and proud.

It helps that for almost all of these images she uses a 4x5 view camera with transparency film, which makes her not only take her time, but also telegraphs to her subject that this sitting is serious business.

“Especially now with selfies everywhere and all these people taking pictures of themselves, the camera says to them, ‘Lola Flash is here and she wants someone who looks dignified,’” she said. “It’s about beauty, pride and power. They’re going to sit up straight and strike a pose. For all of my different series, gone are the days of Massa with people slumped over and not being able to look anybody in the face. Now, we stand up straight.”

Image Robin Cloud, from the “Legends” series. Credit Lola Flash

Image Sur Ron (Sur), from the “Legends” series. Credit Lola Flash

After about 32 years of making pictures with hardly any time to rest, Flash is standing a little taller herself these days, thanks to a retrospective exhibit of her various projects at the Pen and Brush Gallery in Manhattan. It has allowed her — and us — to step back and take in the work of an artist who has stayed true to herself.

Her entry into photography in mid-1980s New York City coincided with her involvement in the movement to heighten awareness of H.I.V. and AIDS as well as the social and political factors that surrounded the issue. ACT UP was starting out, and she embraced its mission, which used direct action and outrage to keep the issue front and center.

“I had wanted to be in the civil rights movement, but I was a bit too young,” she said. “I was too young for the demos about the Vietnam War. I wasn’t happy there was an AIDS crisis, but I was happy to be part of a movement and see how we as a people can get things done.”

Image Heather Litteer, from the “Legends” series. Credit Lola Flash

Some of her strongest images from those early days of the crisis were deeply political, given the prejudice and lack of official urgency at a time when the disease was essentially a death sentence. Her images were surreal, with saturated and inverted tones. She called the process “cross-color,” in which landscapes seemed ablaze and figures like pale phantoms. They could appear menacing, even. She stumbled on the process after deciding she had wasted enough paper — and money — on Cibachrome prints. At school, she found a stock of negative paper that allowed her to print her slides in a different way.

“I started thinking everything black became white, yellow became purple and everything was the opposite,” she said. “Thinking of myself as a black person and how some people say black is bad and white is pure, in my pictures, I’m teasing people. I learned to dial in more yellow or magenta, or make skin tones blue or green. I took away what the people were. Sometimes gender got blurred. It created a world that was more inviting and less judgmental, but still colorful.”

Image “NIH Demo — ACT UP,” 1990. From the “Cross-Color” series, featuring images that reflect on the AIDS crisis. Credit Lola Flash

Image “K is for K.K.K.,” circa 1993. From the “Cross-Color” series. Credit Lola Flash

The emotional toll of those years — during which funerals for young lives cut short by AIDS became a painful routine — led her to move to London in the 1990s, where she went to graduate school. She started covering events for a gay publication, as well as falling in with “a bunch of leather girls” she began to photograph. She also turned to more traditional portraiture as she began exploring various themes that she turned into projects.

Her portrait series since then have included explorations of skin tone among black people, accomplished women over 70 years of age, people who challenged traditional concepts of gender, and trendsetters in the urban underground cultural scene. She had a drive to present her point of view — that of a queer black woman — in a way that defied expectations.

“The queer black voice had a very separate experience than white queers,” she said. “A lot of the time white photographers would sprinkle in people to say they are being inclusive. I do that purposefully in all my projects because I wanted to level the playing field. It’s like tit for tat. It’s my way of showing more people of color in a more beautiful way and showing white people how it feels to be tokenized.”

Image Coreen, from the “Salt” series, featuring portraits of women over 70. Credit Lola Flash

Image Agnes, from the “Salt” series. Credit Lola Flash

Yet the older she gets, the more Flash, 59, wants to produce work for her own community, giving its members portrayals in which they see themselves at their strongest. She is also determined to show them naturally, without lighting or processing tricks.

“I wanted to show the beauty in my community to my community,” she said. “I want to preach to the converted, since for so many years that was not part of my existence. I hate the idea of being tolerated. I like being accepted. Now there is a climate to look and accept, or at least wrestle with it.”

While her show is billed as a retrospective, Flash has no intention of slowing down her production of deeply felt images that delve into questions of identity, race and gender. And she will continue to ask her subjects to reflect on a question she asks right before each sitting — think about power and pride — where sometimes the answer can be startling, as when she did a portrait of the photographer Carrie Mae Weems.

“I asked her to think about someone she really admired,” Flash said. “Carrie was like, ‘O.K., I’ll think about you.’ With that, I went under my dark cloth and told myself to keep it together. I was shaking and blushing. Come on girl, you got this.”

She does.

Image Toni Parks, from the “Salt” series. Credit Lola Flash

Image Kevin, from the “Surmise” series, which explores how genderqueer people are perceived. Credit Lola Flash

Image Shigi, from the “(Sur)passing” series, featuring portraits that explore race and identity. Credit Lola Flash

Follow @nytimesphoto on Twitter. You can also find Lens on Facebook and Instagram.

====================================
22: 0.909411
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyPlanning Begins for Kim Jong-un Meeting Some Trump Aides Believe Will Never HappenOn Friday night, Mr. Trump reiterated on Twitter that “the deal with North Korea is very much in the making,” and that it would be, “if completed, a very good one for the World.”

“Time and place to be determined,” he said.

The White House’s muddled message highlighted the confusion sowed by Mr. Trump’s on-the-spot decision to meet Mr. Kim. Having built its North Korea policy on sanctions and threats of military action, the administration must now learn the language of engagement.

It also served as a reminder of how many hurdles lie ahead before Mr. Trump’s spontaneous decision on Thursday afternoon leads to a meticulously staged meeting between the American president and the dictator who rules the world’s most reclusive country.

“North Korean offers typically come with caveats and asterisks that need to be examined,” said Daniel R. Russel, a former Asia adviser to President Barack Obama. “We all hope that the multiyear pressure campaign has had an effect, but we shouldn’t prematurely celebrate.”

At the State Department, where some diplomats quietly applauded Mr. Trump’s gamble, there was a fear that more hawkish aides in the White House might throw up further hurdles to the meeting. The White House, they said, has invested more in sanctions and military options than in diplomacy. Officials there have in the past expressed frustration about what they viewed as the Pentagon’s reluctance to provide options for a military strike on the North.

With all the potential traps and internal misgivings, some officials said they believed the chances of a meeting between the two leaders actually happening were less than 50 percent.

Mr. Trump’s decision stunned allies and his own advisers, not least Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson, who was caught unaware while traveling in Africa when the president accepted Mr. Kim’s invitation.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Tillerson’s lack of involvement in the announcement underscored how marginalized the State Department has become in North Korea policy. The department’s chief negotiator on the North, Joseph Yun, resigned from the Foreign Service last week.

Other State Department officials insisted that Mr. Tillerson had not been singled out; Mr. Trump blindsided all of his advisers. And the secretary, speaking to reporters in Djibouti, argued that Mr. Trump’s decision was not the bolt from the blue that it seemed.

“This is something that he’s had on his mind for quite some time, so it was not a surprise in any way,” Mr. Tillerson said. “He’s expressed it openly before about his willingness to meet with Kim Jong-un.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Ms. Sanders said the president was in a “great mood” after two momentous days in which he had announced sweeping tariffs on steel and aluminum — fulfilling a cherished campaign promise — and had scrambled the equation on his most pressing foreign policy challenge.

Privately, however, Mr. Trump sounded muted rather than buoyant, according to a person familiar with a round of calls he made Thursday evening to solicit feedback about his surprise move.

While the president told people he liked the concept of a once-in-a-lifetime breakthrough, the person said, he struck a less boisterous note than he usually does publicly when he places a bet on himself.

But in the past 24 hours, the president has told confidants that he felt vindicated by his decision to accept the invitation for a meeting, suggesting his approach has led to a potential new path.

Some advisers in the room with Mr. Trump and the South Korean envoys — including Defense Secretary Jim Mattis and the national security adviser, Lt. Gen. H. R. McMaster — expressed concerns about a meeting, according to a senior official. But nobody vocally opposed it.

Mr. Trump also had to mollify a rattled ally, Japan, which got no advance notice of his decision. In a call, the president reassured Prime Minister Shinzo Abe that the United States would not ease its pressure campaign on North Korea. Mr. Abe, officials said, asked for a meeting with him.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Trump’s call on Friday morning with President Xi Jinping of China was more relaxed. The Chinese have long called for direct talks between the United States and North Korea. American officials said they expected that Mr. Xi would offer Beijing as a venue for the meeting.

The location is one of a number of unresolved issues, including the size and composition of the delegations and the agenda. Some officials said Mr. Trump and Mr. Kim would set a broad framework for the talks, and leave the actual negotiating to subsequent sessions with lower-level officials. Even the logistical issues might require a couple of preliminary meetings, they said.

Still, the lack of direct communication between Pyongyang and Washington was a yellow light to some experts. The two countries communicate through independent channels, one of which — the “New York Channel” — goes through North Korea’s mission to the United Nations.

In recent months, these channels have been used mostly for communications about Americans detained in North Korea. Mr. Yun, the former State Department negotiator, used such a channel to negotiate the return of Otto F. Warmbier, the college student from Cincinnati who suffered an irreversible brain injury while held in prison in Pyongyang.

At some point, officials said, they expected North Korea to send a message about the Trump-Kim meeting through one of the channels. The administration will parse it carefully to assess if it aligns with the message brought to Washington by the South Korean envoys.

South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in, has tried tirelessly to broker a meeting between American and North Korean officials. He sent his envoys — Chung Eui-yong, the national security adviser, and Suh Hoon, the director of the intelligence service — to the White House almost immediately after they returned from their meeting with Mr. Kim in Pyongyang.

The message from the envoys, American officials said, was that the economic sanctions had really crippled the North. Mr. Kim, one official said, referred to North Korea as a poor country.

“This was the most forward-leaning report that we’ve have had in terms of Kim Jong-un’s — not just willingness — but his strong desire for talks,” Mr. Tillerson said. “What changed was his posture in a fairly dramatic way that, in all honesty, came as a little bit of a surprise to us.”

====================================
23: 0.909323
https://www.theguardian.com/us/technologyUS government accused of unlawfully separating hundreds of migrant familiesACLU condemns ‘widespread practice of tearing children away from their parents’ and says government has violated due process

There have been at least 429 cases of immigrant parents being separated from their children in the past two years, according to a class-action lawsuit filed on Friday against the Trump administration.

US immigration kept asylum seeker and daughter apart for months, suit says Read more

The American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) suit alleges the US government has violated due process for hundreds of asylum-seeking families by separating parents and children without a hearing and without showing the child would be endangered by staying with the parent.

Administration officials said last year they were considering implementing a family separation policy to deter asylum seekers. No such policy has been announced.

“Whether or not the Trump administration wants to call this a ‘policy’, it certainly is engaged in a widespread practice of tearing children away from their parents,” said Lee Gelernt, deputy director of the ACLU’s Immigrants’ Rights Project.

Immigrant rights groups said they had seen hundreds of parents separated from their children under the Trump administration and that they expected the practice to continue.

Michelle Brané, director of the Women’s Refugee Commission’s migrant rights and justice program, said her group had identified 429 cases of family separation from its own work and from legal service providers and social service agencies. Brané told the Guardian these cases, which include toddlers to young teenagers, happened “more or less” in the past 15 months.

“I have been informed at various times off the record, by government officials, that there are discussions and plans in place to expand the practice,” Brané said in a court declaration.

These cases included parents and children separated while being placed into immigration proceedings and others separated after the parent was prosecuted for immigration violations while seeking asylum, according to court documents. The suit also claims there is no process for parents to contest a separation.

In the lawsuit, a plaintiff identified as Ms C said she has not seen her 14-year-old son, J, since they arrived in the US in August 2017 to seek asylum. Ms C, who fled Brazil, said she has only spoken to J a few times by phone since the separation.

“I hope I can be with my son very soon,” Ms C said. “I miss him and am scared for him.”

In January, more than 200 child welfare, development, health and justice organizations, including the American Academy of Pediatrics and Unicef, warned that such separations can cause lasting harm to children.

“The psychological distress, anxiety and depression associated with separation from a parent would follow the children well after the immediate period of separation – even after the eventual reunification with a parent or other family,” the organizations said in a letter to the homeland security secretary, Kirstjen Nielsen.

The Department of Homeland Security (DHS), which oversees immigrant detention, does not comment on pending litigation.

In court documents, attorneys and rights groups acknowledged separation may be necessary in cases where it is suspected the adult and child are not related or the parent could pose imminent danger to the child. But they alleged the government had not demonstrated this was the situation for the hundreds of cases in the suit.

The lawsuit filed on Friday broadened a suit filed in late February that challenged the separation of an asylum-seeking mother from her seven-year-old daughter.

The woman, a Congolese citizen named as Ms L in court documents, has been separated from her daughter for four months. DHS released the mother from a San Diego detention facility on Tuesday, but she has not been reunited with her daughter, who was being held in Chicago.

In a letter to DHS sent on 2 March, Democratic Illinois senators Dick Durbin and Tammy Duckworth requested more information on how many children have been separated from their families since Trump took office, how long the separations have been and whether DHS plans to continue separating.

The senators said: “While we may have different views on many immigration policies, we hope you will agree that it is cruel and inhumane to separate a parent from her child and immediately bring a stop to this practice.”

====================================
24: 0.908261
https://www.nytimes.com/section/technologyWith Snap ‘Yes’ in Oval Office, Trump Gambles on North KoreaMr. Trump brushed them off. I get it, I get it, he said.

Where others see flashing yellow lights and slow down, Mr. Trump speeds up. And just like that, in the course of 45 minutes in the Oval Office, Mr. Trump threw aside caution and dispensed with decades of convention to embark on a daring, high-wire diplomatic gambit aimed at resolving one of the world’s most intractable standoffs.

The story of how this came about, assembled through interviews with officials and analysts from the United States, South Korea, Japan and China, is a case study in international relations in the Trump era. A president with no prior foreign policy experience takes on a festering conflict that has vexed the world for years with a blend of impulse and improvisation, and with no certain outcome. One moment, he is hurling playground insults and threatening nuclear war, the next he is offering the validation of a presidential meeting.

Whether the high-stakes gamble ultimately pays off, no one can know. Given two unpredictable and highly combustible leaders, it seems just as likely that the meeting will never take place. If it does occur, the challenges are so steep, the gulf so wide and the history so fraught with misunderstanding, suspicion and broken promises that the prospect of an enduring resolution to the impasse seems remote.

But Mr. Trump has staked his reputation as a deal maker on the presumption that he can personally achieve what no other president has before him.

A Thorny Road

The path to a possible meeting led through a thicket of hostility and feints.

Throughout his first year in office, Mr. Trump ratcheted up economic sanctions while rattling his nuclear saber at “Little Rocket Man” and threatening to “totally destroy North Korea.”

Mr. Kim could match the president he called “the mentally deranged U.S. dotard” bombast for bombast. In a New Year’s Day speech, he said he had “a nuclear button on the desk” that could launch missiles capable of reaching the United States. Mr. Trump responded with a tweet saying that “I too have a Nuclear Button, but it is a much bigger & more powerful one than his.”

But South Korea’s president, Moon Jae-in, focused on the other part of Mr. Kim’s speech, when he declared that he would send athletes to the Winter Olympics, which would be held the next month in South Korea. A flurry of negotiations ensued at Panmunjom, the “truce village” inside the Korean demilitarized zone, that, by the standards of inter-Korean talks, went unusually well.

Photo

For the opening ceremony, on Feb. 9, Mr. Kim sent his sister, Kim Yo-jong, while Mr. Trump sent Vice President Mike Pence. The vice president was told of a possible meeting with North Korean officials at the Games if he would tone down his message, not talk about sanctions, not meet with defectors and not bring along Fred Warmbier, whose son, Otto, an American student, died soon after being released from captivity in North Korea.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Pence opted to do all of those anyway to show resolve, and the North Koreans canceled the meeting at the last minute. Taking the hard-line position he believed the president wanted him to take, a grim-faced Mr. Pence refused to stand for the entry of the joint Korean team that included athletes from both North and South and made a point of refusing to greet Mr. Kim’s sister, who was just 10 feet away.

Mr. Pence’s failure to stand was taken as an insult to Mr. Moon and the South Korean public, undercutting the vice president’s intent to show solidarity with an ally. Mr. Moon had been determined to bring the Americans and North Koreans together, to the irritation of the American delegation, which believed that he was deliberately trying to stage-manage an encounter they considered awkward and inappropriate.

Mr. Moon, by contrast, hosted Ms. Kim for a lavish luncheon at the presidential Blue House, and she surprised him with a letter from her brother. She told Mr. Moon that her brother wanted to convene a summit meeting at an early date. The two spent nearly three hours together, with Mr. Moon doing most of the talking.

He said that he really wanted to meet Mr. Kim and improve ties, but that there was a limit to how far he could go without progress in dismantling the North’s nuclear program. He urged North Korea to talk to the Americans and said they needed to hurry so as not to lose the rare momentum from the spirit of the Olympics visits.

A Family Envoy

After the unfortunate optics from Mr. Pence’s visit and what some viewed as a missed opportunity, Mr. Trump sent his daughter, Ivanka Trump, to the closing ceremony of the Games. She had dinner with Mr. Moon at the Blue House and briefed him on new sanctions her father would impose on North Korea, then made a public statement to reporters reaffirming the American strategy of “maximum pressure.”

She then headed to Pyeongchang for the last two days of competition. Briefed by Mr. Pence’s staff, Ms. Trump and her team were “incredibly forceful,” as one official put it, in going over the seating plan for the box and the timing and sequencing of arrivals to avoid any surprises.

Ms. Trump proffered a smiling, more open image that went over better in South Korea. She stood for the South Korean athletes, who this time entered the stadium separately from their compatriots from the North, and posed for photographs with famous Korean pop stars. But she too made a point of sending a message; for her guest in the box, she brought Gen. Vincent K. Brooks, commander of American forces in South Korea.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

When she attended a curling event, Ms. Trump’s team received word that the North Koreans were on their way in what the Americans thought was an effort to make a scene or prompt her to leave in an embarrassing spectacle. Ms. Trump decided to stay, and the North Koreans in the end did not come.

All Smiles in the North

With the Olympics over, it was time for Mr. Moon to make his move. Last week, he sent two trusted aides on a two-day trip to Pyongyang: Mr. Chung, his national security adviser, and Suh Hoon, his National Intelligence Service director. Flying north, they knew that they were meeting Mr. Kim but not when.

After landing in Pyongyang, they were taken to a riverside guesthouse where they found their rooms equipped with the internet and access to foreign television channels, including CNN. They could even surf South Korean websites, a rare privilege in the totalitarian state. As soon as they unpacked, Kim Yong-chol, a general who heads inter-Korean relations, showed up and said that they were meeting Mr. Kim that evening.

Black limousines took the South Koreans to Azalea Hall in the ruling Workers’ Party headquarters, Mr. Kim’s workplace. They found Mr. Kim and his sister waiting to greet them with broad smiles. Mr. Chung and Mr. Suh were the first South Koreans to set foot inside the party headquarters since the Korean War.

Photo

Mr. Chung had barely launched into his talking points when Mr. Kim said “I know” and “I understand you.” Then he laid out his proposal: talks with the United States on denuclearizing his country; a suspension of nuclear and missile tests during the talks; and his understanding that the United States and South Korea must proceed with annual joint military exercises.

The South Koreans found Mr. Kim to be an extremely confident leader. He was closely following foreign news media, knew how he was depicted, and even joked about it. He had studied Mr. Moon’s speeches and overtures toward the North.

He even joked about his missile launches. “I was sorry to hear that President Moon Jae-in had to convene his National Security Council meetings early in the morning because of our missile launchings,” he told the South Koreans. “Now, he won’t lose his early morning sleep any more.”

Newsletter Sign Up Continue reading the main story Please verify you're not a robot by clicking the box. Invalid email address. Please re-enter. You must select a newsletter to subscribe to. Sign Up You agree to receive occasional updates and special offers for The New York Times's products and services. Thank you for subscribing. An error has occurred. Please try again later. View all New York Times newsletters.

Mr. Kim agreed to open a direct hotline to Mr. Moon. “Now if working-level talks are deadlocked and if our officials act like arrogant blockheads, President Moon can just call me directly and the problem will be solved,” he said.

And, he added, he was eager to hold a summit meeting with his South Korean counterpart. The South Koreans suggested Pyongyang, Seoul and Panmunjom as possible sites and asked Mr. Kim to choose. Mr. Kim said he would come to the Peace House, a South Korean building inside Panmunjom.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The meeting and dinner, complete with wines and traditional Korean liquor, lasted from 6 p.m. to 10:12 p.m. with much laughter and bonhomie.

After returning to Seoul on Tuesday, the South Korean officials briefed Mr. Moon and then South Korean reporters. After his news conference, Mr. Chung called General McMaster and told him that he was carrying a message from Mr. Kim to Mr. Trump. Only several people at the Blue House knew that the message included a proposal for a meeting with Mr. Trump.

Off to Washington

Mr. Chung and Mr. Suh flew to Washington, arriving Thursday morning. By the afternoon, they were at the White House, meeting separately with General McMaster and Gina Haspel, the deputy C.I.A. director. The four then got together and were soon joined by other American officials, including Mr. Pence, Mr. Mattis, Dan Coats, the national intelligence director, Gen. Joseph F. Dunford Jr., the Joint Chiefs of Staff chairman, and John F. Kelly, the White House chief of staff.

Joined by their ambassador to Washington, the South Korean visitors were not supposed to meet with Mr. Trump until Friday, but when he heard they were in the building, he called them to the Oval Office.

Mr. Kim’s invitation to meet was not a complete surprise to Mr. Trump’s team. An American official said they had learned about it from intelligence agencies, so on Thursday morning, before the arrival of the South Koreans, Mr. Trump talked by phone with Secretary of State Rex W. Tillerson, who was traveling in Africa, about the possibility. What he did not tell Mr. Tillerson was that he would accept.

Mr. Trump was eager enough, however, that once he said yes, they discussed a meeting as early as next month. The South Koreans suggested it would be better to wait until after Mr. Moon’s summit meeting with Mr. Kim in April, which led to a target of May.

Not only did Mr. Trump surprise the South Koreans by accepting immediately, he even suggested that they make the public announcement right there and then at the White House.

Photo

A stunned Mr. Chung retreated to General McMaster’s office to draft a statement in collaboration with the Americans. Then, using a secure telephone line, he called Mr. Moon early in the morning in Seoul to get his approval.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Elated, Mr. Trump stuck his head into the White House briefing room to tell reporters there would be an important announcement soon, something he had never done before.

Some of the president’s advisers objected to the idea of a foreign official making a statement from the White House lectern, so they had him do it instead on the White House driveway, where visitors typically speak with reporters. Still, it was highly unusual for a foreign official to announce an American president’s decision in a major international situation.

Out of the Loop

Mr. Trump’s quick decision caught many off guard, including Mr. Tillerson and American allies. Television networks set up live feeds from the White House driveway to carry Mr. Chung’s announcement. Congressional leaders and top officials at the Pentagon and the State Department learned what was happening from news reports.

The fact that it came on the same day that the president slapped stiff new tariffs on imported steel that would hit South Korea and Japan hard indicated how hasty and unplanned it was.

While Mr. Chung headed to the driveway, Mr. Trump hurriedly called Prime Minister Shinzo Abe of Japan to let him know. Mr. Abe has worked assiduously to cultivate a close relationship with Mr. Trump and taken a hard line on North Korea, but he was left out of the loop, a fact that stung.

“I have an impression that the Japanese are not quite well informed,” said Yoshiki Mine, head of a previous Japanese delegation seeking normalized relations with North Korea. “What we have been told is awfully out of tune, I should say.”

Mr. Trump did not reach President Xi Jinping of China until the next morning. China has backed Mr. Trump on North Korea, generating good will between Mr. Trump and Mr. Xi. But China refused last month to go along with an American plan to interdict oil tankers bound for North Korea on the high seas, demonstrating that there were limits to how far China would go in punishing Mr. Kim, given the risk of a North Korean collapse on its borders.

Mr. Trump said his conversation with Mr. Xi went well. “President XI told me he appreciates that the U.S. is working to solve the problem diplomatically rather than going with the ominous alternative,” the president wrote on Twitter on Saturday. “China continues to be helpful!”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But in response to Mr. Trump’s planned meeting, China is engaged in what some call “exclusion anxiety,” worried about being shut out. China would like the meeting to be held in Beijing, where six-nation talks were held with North Korea during President George W. Bush’s administration, but Chinese analysts doubt Mr. Kim would agree.

For now, Mr. Trump is juggling these dynamics and preparing to meet the world’s most hermetic leader. To his advisers, Mr. Trump has said he is impressed that Mr. Kim at such a young age has outmaneuvered almost everyone, but he has added that the North Korean leader is a wild card.

Of course, so is he. Mr. Trump vacillates between confidence and fatalism when it comes to North Korea. For the moment, he is optimistic.

“North Korea has not conducted a Missile Test since November 28, 2017 and has promised not to do so through our meetings,” he wrote on Twitter on Saturday. “I believe they will honor that commitment!”