-0.441*"mr" + 0.258*"s9" + -0.202*"north" + -0.171*"trump" + 0.165*"galaxy" + -0.152*"korea" + -0.132*"kim" + 0.132*"samsung" + 0.115*"sony" + -0.114*"korean"

====================================
0: 0.621383
https://www.techradar.com/newsFortnite cross-play between PS4 and Xbox One still isn't happeningA couple of days ago we heard that Fortnite was expanding its reach to mobiles with iOS and Android support, and planning to allow opt-in cross-play between mobile devices and consoles. Now we've got a bit more clarification on what that means – and there's good and bad news for gamers.

First of all, Xbox One owners can get in on the action, up to a point. While Microsoft's console wasn't mentioned in the original announcement, an official Fortnite blog post confirms that Xbox One owners will be able to game against their friends on iOS (from next week) and Android (in the coming months).

Less positive is the news that cross-play support between Xbox One and the Sony PlayStation 4 still isn't happening. That was confirmed in a tweet by Nick Chester, PR manager at Fortnite's publisher Epic Games. Xbox One and PS4 users will all be able to battle against players on PC and mobile – but not against each other.

The new functionality is rolling out in the 3.2 update that started appearing on Thursday, together with the usual collection of extra goodies and bug fixes. There's a new Team of 20 event to make use of and some additional loot on Twitch if currently subscribe to the Amazon Prime service.

As for why we're still not seeing console-to-console cross-play support, your guess is as good as ours – Microsoft has previously gone on the record to say it wants to bring cross-play support to its major titles, while Sony has remained mostly silent on the matter. Of course, Sony sells a lot more consoles than MIcrosoft does, so it doesn't need the extra pools of players quite so much.

Back in September, Xbox One and PS4 players could battle against each other on Fortnite – but that was due to a configuration error that was swiftly fixed. It obviously is technically possible for this to happen, but the parties involved can't come to an agreement for whatever reason.

Via The Verge

====================================
1: 0.59223
https://www.usatoday.com/tech/White House supports arming teachers, will audit FBI tip lineCLOSE U.S. Education Secretary Betsy DeVos says she's interested in hearing suggestions to improve school safety from students at a Florida high school where 17 people were killed last month in mass shooting. (March 7) AP

Secretary of Education Betsy DeVos speaks at a news conference following a visit to Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in the aftermath of a Feb. 14 mass shooting at the school, Wednesday, March 7, 2018, in Coral Springs, Fla. (Photo: Lynne Sladky, AP)

U.S. Education Secretary Betsy DeVos will lead a commission tasked with broadly examining ways to protect schools from gun violence, the White House said Sunday.

Administration officials also said the White House would support arming school personnel who volunteer for the job, offering federal funds to provide "rigorous firearms training” to qualified employees.

The proposal has angered education groups, who have said arming educators could put both adults and students at risk. National Education Association President Lily Eskelsen García last month said, "Bringing more guns into our schools does nothing to protect our students and educators from gun violence."

But DeVos, who has met with students, teachers and families in the wake of the deadly Feb. 14 shooting at Marjory Stoneman Douglas High School in Parkland, Fla., said little progress had been made protecting students over the past several years. “No student, no family, no teacher and no school should have to live the horror of Parkland or Sandy Hook or Columbine again,” she said.

While not immediately committing to any ideas or timetables, DeVos said, "No stone will be left unturned” in the effort to uncover and highlight evidence-based approaches proven to reduce violence.

“We’ve had to talk about this topic way too much over the years,” DeVos told reporters during a conference call Sunday. “And there’s been a lot of talk in the past but very little action.”

Senior administration officials familiar with the effort said no proposals would be off the table. “All topics are open to being addressed on this commission,” one official said.

The commission will consider raising the age to 21 under which people can buy certain kinds of firearms, but the official wouldn't commit to supporting the proposal outright, saying, "Obviously we want everything we do in here to be evidence-based at actually trying to help to reduce violence — not just try to check a box.”

More: 132 hours to train teachers on guns: Is it enough?

More: NRA provided grants to Arizona high school shooting clubs

The National Rifle Association (NRA) last week sued to block a new Florida law, signed by Gov. Rick Scott, that prohibits gun sales to anyone under 21. But the White House official said the lawsuit would not affect the commission's work. “We are not concerned … about the NRA here.”

Trump on Saturday criticized the use of blue-ribbon commissions in dealing with drug dealers, telling a crowd at a rally near Pittsburgh, "We can't just keep setting up blue-ribbon committees with your wife and your wife and your husband, and they meet and they have a meal and they talk, talk talk talk, two hours later, then they write a report."

But one White House official on Sunday defended the idea of a commission on school safety, saying Trump “is committed to finding every way possible and encouraging states and communities to find and adopt every way possible to protect the students in their care.”

As part of the effort, the administration will also conduct a full audit and review of the FBI tip line, which failed to keep the alleged Parkland shooter from acquiring guns.

Andrew Bremberg, director of the White House’s Domestic Policy Council, said the administration would call on states to approve “risk-protection orders,” temporary court orders that allow law enforcement to remove guns from at-risk people — and keep them from buying new guns.

Trump has also proposed banning bump stocks, which allow a few models of firearms to fire more rapidly.

More: A warning to potential shooters: These schools are armed

More: Man destroys his semi-automatic rifle to support Parkland students

The U.S. Justice Department has submitted a regulation that would make the devices illegal to own or sell. Bump stocks became notorious after police last October said they were used in the Las Vegas mass shooting that killed 58 people.

Appearing on ABC’s This Week on Sunday, White House principal deputy press secretary Raj Shah said Trump supports raising to 21 the age for purchasing “certain firearms.” Shah wouldn’t say whether Trump will call for universal background checks on gun sales.

The White House on Sunday said it supports legislation introduced by Sen. John Cornyn, R-Texas, and Sen. Chris Murphy, D-Conn., that would improve information in the National Instant Criminal Background Check System.

The administration said the commission would consider changes to "existing entertainment rating systems" and youth consumption of violent entertainment, as well as the effects of press coverage of mass shootings. Trump met last week with representatives of the video game industry, as well as critics of the industry.

The commission will also consider repealing Obama administration discipline policies and will study, among other issues, the effectiveness and appropriateness of "psychotropic medication" for treating troubled youth.

Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., late Sunday said the White House "has taken tiny baby steps designed not to upset the NRA, when the gun violence epidemic in this country demands that giant steps be taken."

He said Senate Democrats would "push to go further," including passing universal background checks, federal legislation on protection orders and pushing for a debate on banning assault weapons.

Follow Greg Toppo on Twitter: @gtoppo

Read or Share this story: https://usat.ly/2p7V8vv

====================================
2: 0.568206
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/news/The best DSLR cameras you can buy: from beginners to prosWhile smartphone cameras and point and shoots have improved significantly over the years, for true photographers nothing beats a serious DSLR camera to get the perfect shot.

DSLR cameras have grown to become the mainstay of professional digital camera photography. Standing for digital single-lens reflex camera, these digital cameras are the most popular type of interchangeable lens camera, where users can add improved lenses to get the best photos.

Even entry-level DSLR camera can provide a serious step up on the kind of pictures you can get from a smartphone. The main brands out there are Canon and Nikon, but distinguishing between the different models can be tricky.

The Telegraph has taken a look at some of the best DSLR cameras available now, with options for users from beginners to professionals.

The best DSLR cameras you can buy

Nikon D3400

£454, Currys

====================================
3: 0.557921
https://www.techradar.com/newsFinding my happy place between driving and autonomySelf-driving cars don't scare me. I'm all for smart cities and autonomous vehicles making transport, and our lives, more efficient. Bring it on, I say!

What I am worried about though is no longer being able to hit the open road and just drive.

I don't want a world that only consists of self-driving cars, but there's a lot to thank the technology that's driving the autonomous movement forward for, as it's making driving right now even better.

The Jaguar XE R-Sport is just one of the many premium cars on the market that's taking advantage of the developing tech, and after 800 miles behind the wheel I'm extremely happy it's there.

The learning curve

We drove Jaguar XE R-Sport

Engine: 2.0 litre Twin Turbocharged Diesel

Power: 240hp

Top speed: 155mph

0-62mph: 6.1 seconds

Fuel efficiency: 54.4mpg

Price: £57,809

There's a lot of technology inside the XE R-Sport and you'll need to spend some time with the car to get to grips with it all.

The manual is in the glove box, but I was able to work the majority of it out as it's fairly intuitive for those familiar with in-car systems. It could well be a daunting prospect for novices though, with a couple of sleepless nights reading the manual possible.

You'll also need to take a moment to ready yourself for the beeping. From parking sensors, to traffic camera warnings to collision alert and more, there is an awful lot of things that go beep here.

Thankfully you can turn off the ones you don't wish to shrill at you, reducing the in-car cacophony. Spend some time with the technology, and adjust the settings to your liking and it starts to all seamlessly blend together.

Setting the adaptive cruise control on the motorway to 70mph and then sitting in lane as the car automatically tracks the speed of the car in front, maintains a safe distance and reduces and increases your speed to match is just part of the enhanced experience.

There's also lane assistance, which not only tells you if you're straying too close to the edge of your lane, but gently tugs the steering to re-center you.

You'll need to keep your hands on the wheel throughout, and your feet over the pedals, but when faced with several hundred motorway miles it reduces the variables you need to consider, reducing stress and concentration and making the journey less tiring.

Coupled with the 2.0 litre Twin Turbocharged Diesel engine and automatic transmission, you can easily eat up motorway miles without noticing.

Turn off the motorway and front collision alert will notify you if you're approaching the car in front a little too keenly, or if someone has suddenly pulled out in front of you and you've not been giving it your full attention.

It warns you enough in advance to stamp on the brakes without sliding into the back of a car.

Then there are the automatic lights and wipers, reducing again the amount you have to think about, making the drive more effortless.

The car is always on the lookout then, attempting to not only make driving easier, but also safer.

Jaguar XE R-Sport exterior gallery

Image 1 of 8 Image 2 of 8 Image 3 of 8 Image 4 of 8 Image 5 of 8 Image 6 of 8 Image 7 of 8 Image 8 of 8

Passenger fascination

It's not just the driver who gets to benefit from the technological onslaught here, as all four main seats in the XE R-Sport are heated, with the front two also boasting air-conditioning - as there's nothing worse than bare skin on leather on a hot day.

Climate control ensures each passenger sits in a temperate environment that suits them, while Bluetooth music streaming from your phone to the infotainment system makes it easy to pass round the handset so everyone can pick a song.

Then there's the central, 10-inch touchscreen display. It's bright, clear and responsive, ensuring it's easy to use whether you're setting up the satellite navigation, or selecting your favorite radio station.

Jaguar XE R-Sport interior gallery

Image 1 of 11 Image 2 of 11 Image 3 of 11 Image 4 of 11 Image 5 of 11 Image 6 of 11 Image 7 of 11 Image 8 of 11 Image 9 of 11 Image 10 of 11 Image 11 of 11

However, there is a real party piece hidden in this setup too - Jaguar's Dual View display.

Hit the Dual View in the bottom nav bar of the screen and you can choose what your passenger sees on screen, while you - the driver - see something completely different.

It allows you to have a full map view for navigation, while your passenger can opt to see something different such as the now playing screen for the stereo. That's not all though.

Open up the glove box and you'll find a pair of wireless, Jaguar-branded headphones. Turn them on, pop them on the head of your passenger, slide a DVD into the player in the glove box and they can watch a movie as your hurtle down the freeway.

Meanwhile the driver is none-the-wiser, and can listen to music through the car's stereo and continue to view navigation directions on the main screen.

A post shared by John McCann (@johnbmmccann) A photo posted by on on Jan 8, 2018 at 12:58pm PST

It all works surprisingly well, and while Dual View is a pricey (around £625) optional extra, if you have the money it's a cool addition.

It goes without saying then, that the Jaguar XE R-Sport is jam-packed full of cutting edge technology and we've not even mentioned the front, rear and kerb-side cameras, USB ports, heads-up display and digital dash.

They may not be new technologies for cars, but the inclusion of all this tech makes the XE R-Sport a fantastic ride for any tech enthusiastic.

But for those who still want to have the thrill of actually driving, you can switch off the toys, opt for the paddle shift gearbox, put your foot down and have a lot of fun.

====================================
4: 0.552979
https://www.cnet.com/news/Galaxy S9 vs. iPhone X: Which to buySamsung's Galaxy S9 and S9 Plus have come to fight for Apple's smartphone crown with new features and supercharged cameras. But the iPhone X won't go down easily, and deciding between the newest Galaxy and iPhone may prove tougher than ever.

Preorders for the Galaxy S9 and S9 Plus start on March 2, and the phones hit stores on March 16. We'll have our reviews posted before that latter date and they'll have definitive answers on how the new Samsungs stack up. But if you can't wait until then, there are some things we already definitively know -- like price, screen size and the headphone jack situation -- that may help inform your buying decision.

Now Playing: Watch this: How does the Galaxy S9 compare to the iPhone X?

Price

Samsung has a flat-out advantage here. The cheapest iPhone X (64GB) will cost you $999 (£999, AU$1,579). Expect to spend less on the S9, and you get two price points to choose from. Prices vary from carrier to carrier, starting at $720 (£739, AU$1,199) for the S9 and $840 (£869, AU$1,349). Those are also 64GB models, but -- unlike iPhones -- they can be easily and massively expanded with the addition of cheap MicroSD cards.

Note that Apple's iPhone 8 Plus, which features nearly all of the X's features, is much more price competitive with the S9 Plus, but it's got those old-fashioned big bezels.

Advantage: Samsung

Headphone jack

This one's another clear win for Samsung. It has a headphone jack. The iPhone X does not. The X requires you to use a dongle for traditional headphones, use Apple's Lightning port headphones or you can use the Bluetooth option on both phones.

Advantage: Samsung

Software and ecosystem

Android Oreo 8.0 vs iOS 11 is pretty much like comparing apples to oranges (ahem!), but switching from either is a big deal. If you have deep ties to one or the other, this might be another easy deal-breaker.

Even if you're neutral on your operating system preference, however, remember that your OS choice has impact beyond the phone. If you've already purchased all of your TV shows on iTunes, you won't be able to access them on a Galaxy phone. Bought a HomePod? Also no good on Samsung. Google services, meanwhile, are much more Apple friendly, but still not 100 percent compatible. You can send audio and video from some but not all of your iPhone apps to Chromecast devices, for instance.

Advantage: Varies by user preference

Design

Both phones are glass-on-glass with metal frames and barely-there bezels. The S9s have curved edges and screens that appear to spill over the sides. The bezels on the iPhone X are slimmer top to bottom, but you get the intrusive notch at the top. The iPhone comes in monochromatic Space Gray and silver, while the S9 comes in Midnight Black, Coral Blue, Lilac Purple and Titanium Gray.

Advantage: Varies by user preference

Screen

The iPhone X's screen is the same size as the 5.8-inch screen on the S9 (minus the notch), while the S9 Plus has a larger 6.2-inch screen. All three are OLED displays, but the S9 has a slightly higher resolution and pixel density (2,960x1,440 pixels/529ppi and 570ppi) than the Super HD Retina Display on the iPhone X (2,436X1,12,200 pixels/458 ppi). The iPhone X however has TrueTone technology that adjusts the color temperature of the screen relative to the type of ambient light, so that colors look accurate no matter what the lighting condition.

Advantage: Samsung for size and resolution, but color preference will vary.

Speakers



The iPhone X has stereo speakers on the bottom of the phone and on the earpiece. The S9 and S9 Plus are the first Galaxy phones to also get stereo speakers. They're tuned by AKG and have a Dolby Atmos codec which translates into richer, louder sound than that of the previous S8. The S9 also allows you to adjust the audio profile from the settings.

Advantage: Both have a stereo speaker configuration, but the advantage is TBD until we can listen to them both side by side outside of a demo room.

Fingerprint scanner

Josh Miller/CNET

Neither phone has an in-screen fingerprint scanner like the Vivo X20 Plus UD or the Apex concept phone, but the S9 kept the fingerprint scanner on the back of the phone like its predecessor for mobile payments and unlocking your phone. Except this time it's in a better position. It's below the camera instead of beside it like on the S8. To unlock the iPhone X or to verify a payment, you'll have to use the FaceID feature or a passcode. The iPhone 8 Plus has the trusty ol' TouchID fingerprint sensor on the front, but that's at the expense of thick top and bottom bezels.

Advantage: Samsung, if a fingerprint sensor is a must-have

Face-unlock (FaceID vs. Intelligent Scan)

Both phones have facial-recognition features that can be used to unlock them, but the technology used is different. The iPhone X has a True Depth (depth-sensing) camera on the front of the phone that maps out your face in 3D using infrared dots. Apple says FaceID authentication is even more secure than its TouchID authentication on the fingerprint scanner.

The Galaxy S9 and S9 Plus use Intelligent Scan, a combination of the iris scanner and the less-secure facial recognition feature that uses the non-depth sensing front camera to unlock. This feature "favors ease of unlocking over security" and defaults to the "trickable" Face Unlock feature and only used the more secure iris scanner as a backup when lighting conditions don't allow for a full face scan.

In her review, CNET reviews Section Editor Jessica Dolcourt found that the iPhone X's FaceID is more tamper-proof than the S9's Intelligent scan, although iris unlock on the Galaxy S8 and newer is still secure.

Advantage: Apple

Cameras

It's still early to declare a winner in this category because we have yet to test an S9 in the real world, but here are the facts.

The S9 has a single main shooter, while the S9 Plus has a dual-lens setup similar to that of the iPhone X with a 12MP wide angle and 12MP telephoto lens for better zoom and DSLR-style portraits. The S9 Plus allows you to control the intensity of the blur while you're taking the shot or after, much like the Note 8. The iPhone X, on the other hand, has Portrait Lighting that lets you play with different lighting options for portraits during or after you take the shot. Check out our comparison if you want to see them both in action.

Galaxy S9 Plus iPhone X 12MP wide-angle ƒ/1.5 or ƒ/2.4 (dual aperture) 12MP telephoto ƒ/2.4 (aperture) 12MP wide-angle ƒ/1.8 (aperture) 12MP telephoto ƒ/2.4 (aperture)

What's unique about the S9 is that the main lens has a variable aperture which changes from f1.5 and f2.4 depending on the lighting and has the potential to improve low-light shots significantly. It's a feature that's been around for ages in point-and-shoot cameras, but it's new for a phone and this is why it matters. It also lets you choose the aperture yourself from the camera's Pro Mode.

The S9 also has a new super-slow-motion feature that lets you record video up to 960 fps in HD. But based on our preliminary testing the mode is not as straight-forward because the camera only captures 6 seconds of super slow-mo and it automatically decides what part should be at this speed. It also has a 240fps option at 1080P that you set manually. The iPhone X has a fixed aperture of ƒ/1.8 and a max slo-mo rate of 240 fps in Full HD.

The front cameras, meanwhile, break down as follows: The S9 has an 8MP front camera with an ƒ/1.7 aperture, compared to the 7MP depth-sensing camera with an ƒ/2.2 aperture on the iPhone X. Both use software to achieve a have a blurred background option for selfies and augmented reality capabilities. But according to Jessica, the blur on the S9's Selfie Focus mode is more agressive, often blurring out too much of the subject, while the iPhone X's seems to be more forgiving.

For what it's worth, DxO Mark has already anointed the Galaxy S9 Plus as having the best smartphone camera on the market, surpassing both the iPhone X and the Google Pixel 2. You can check a few of the S9's shots for yourself in our gallery.

Advantage: TBD after testing

AR emojis vs. animojis

AR emojis are Samsung's take on Apple's Animojis, the animated emojis that can be controlled with your face. Apple's Animojis focus on a few emojis like the poop and the unicorn with more coming with the iOS 11.3 launch in the spring. While the S9 gives you a few more options to chose from . You can transform your face into an animal or Disney character or you can customize your own avatar by taking a selfie on either camera.

Our CNET editors took turns trying out the AR emojis and the consensus was that the technology seems lackluster and the results creepy because the gestures on the animations didn't really match the real-life version. CNET's Jessica Dolcourt said, "Samsung's AR Emoji feature lacks the charm and verve of iPhone's Animojis -- they came off as eerie and unfinished."

Advantage: Apple

Storage

The S9 has three tiers of onboard storage options depending on the market (64GB, 120GB and 256GB) with up to 400GB of expandable storage. The iPhone X only offers a 64GB and 256GB option with no SD card slot.

Advantage: Samsung

Speed

The motors on both these phones are beasts, but it's hard to compare them without the S9 in our hands. The S9s are powered by Qualcomm's Snapdragon 845 or the Samsung Exynos 9810, depending on your region, while the iPhone has Apple's A11 Bionic chip on the iPhone X.

Our early tests of the Qualcomm 845 yielded strong results versus other Android phones when we benchmarked "white box" phones earlier this month, though it's unclear if the Galaxy S9's Snapdragons will be optimized at the same speeds. Similar tests by Anandtech on the new Exynos chip were decidedly less encouraging, but the site noted that it was unclear if its test device was representative of the final shipping product.

To that end, you'll have to wait for benchmarking tests from CNET and others once we get final consumer versions of the phones.

Advantage: TBD after testing

Battery

Both have wireless charging and some form of fast charging, but the S9 has a larger battery than the iPhone. Sometimes the size of the battery doesn't determine the usage time, so again we'll have to wait for the results from our tests to determine a winner.

Advantage: TBD after testing

Decisions, decisions...

The Galaxy S9 and S9 Plus look strong in the early running, but so far, this is more of a specs and price comparison than anything else. If some of those early "known knowns" sway you -- say, the price and headphone jack on the Galaxy S9, or the iOS and Face ID on the iPhone -- maybe you're ready to whip out your credit card and take the plunge.

But for everybody else waiting to see how those key "TBD" items compare -- battery life, speed and the camera, just to name a few -- hang on until our full reviews hit. We'll update this story at that time.

Editors' note March 1: Originally published at 4 a.m. PT. Updated at 9:27 a.m. PT with news on DxO test, Anandtech benchmarks and additional context.

Editor's note, March 10: Article has been updated with results from CNET's full review of the Galaxy S9.

====================================
5: 0.55031
https://www.theverge.com/techApple is updating its MFi program logoApple is giving the logo for its MFi program a refresh, offering manufacturers 90 days three new designs to work with, reports ChargerLab.

Launched in 2005, the MFi Program is a licensing scheme for third-party manufacturers to ensure that their accessories are compatible with Apple’s various products. Companies have to go through testing to adhere to Apple’s standards, and can use a logo to advertise that their products can work with iPods, iPhones, and iPads.

Apple is changing up that single logo for a trio of new ones. The new design ditches the tiny iPod, iPhone, and iPad illustrations in favor of the Apple logo, and introduces three specific logos: one for the iPhone, one for the iPhone and iPad, and one for each of the three devices. Manufacturers have 90 days to update their product designs to include the new logo.

====================================
6: 0.55031
https://www.theverge.com/techApple is updating its MFi program logoApple is giving the logo for its MFi program a refresh, offering manufacturers 90 days three new designs to work with, reports ChargerLab.

Launched in 2005, the MFi Program is a licensing scheme for third-party manufacturers to ensure that their accessories are compatible with Apple’s various products. Companies have to go through testing to adhere to Apple’s standards, and can use a logo to advertise that their products can work with iPods, iPhones, and iPads.

Apple is changing up that single logo for a trio of new ones. The new design ditches the tiny iPod, iPhone, and iPad illustrations in favor of the Apple logo, and introduces three specific logos: one for the iPhone, one for the iPhone and iPad, and one for each of the three devices. Manufacturers have 90 days to update their product designs to include the new logo.

====================================
7: 0.547918
https://techcrunch.com/Essential really wants to solve the screen notch problemIn a way, Essential is something of a pioneer. Before the iPhone X helped the world reluctantly embrace the screen notch, the company proudly displayed one atop its first flagship. Since then, of course, it’s become a feature, not a bug, with a long list of companies rushing to embrace it on their latest flagship.

But Essential’s clearly hoping to solve the issue with a number of patents looking to stick a camera directly behind the display. The Andy Rubin-founded company has been on quite a patent run in recent months — but the ones pertaining to a “camera integrated into a display” are the most compelling of the lot. And if it comes to fruition, it could breathe new life into the company’s upcoming handsets after an admittedly slow start.

The patent describes a multi-layered display with camera in which a “substantially transparent region allows light from outside to reach the camera to record an image.” The patent points to a potential application in which the camera is mounted behind the LCD.

In the imagery accompanying the post, the camera is positioned in its customary spot up top — you know, where the notch should be. In another iteration of the same idea, the camera is located behind the screen’s color layer and “records the light from the outside colored by the color filter layer.”

A separate patent has “an irregularly shaped electronic display, including a hollowed out display within which a sensor, such as a camera, can be placed. The manufacturing techniques enable the creation of the hollow anytime during the manufacturing process. The resulting electronic display occupies the full side of the mobile device, with the sensors placed within and surrounded by the display.”

There are a ton of Essential patents revolving around the idea, and as Rubin recently pointed out on Twitter, the company also holds a two-year-old patent describing a camera that pops out of the top of the phone — a concept that began showing up on actual devices last month at MWC, along with Huawei’s new nose-view keyboard camera.

Both patents include a fun little addition, wherein the camera is located behind a camera icon. Tapping the icon would activate the camera. Of course, depending on how all of this is implemented, you probably don’t want to put a camera in a spot that is going to accumulate a substantial amount of your disgusting finger grease.

“The integrated camera serves two purposes: to record pictures,” the patent reads, “and to act as a camera icon, that when selected activates the camera. By removing the camera from the front side of the mobile device, or by integrating the camera into the display screen of the mobile device, the size of the mobile device display screen can be increased.”

Of course, the standard patent disclaimers apply here — there’s no guarantee the company plans to (or is even able to) implement the technologies outlined in these forms. Such patents are often pie in the sky ideas or just IP grabs. We reached out to Essential and the company declined to comment any further on the patents.

====================================
8: 0.546836
https://www.theverge.com/techSamsung Galaxy S9 review: predictably great, predictably flawedThere comes a point in most successful products’ existences where they become predictable. The new model, building off of the triumphs of its prior version, maintains the same look and feel while introducing more subtle enhancements. Apple’s used this tack with the iPhone and iPad for multiple generations, and Microsoft has done the same with the Surface Pro in recent years. Don’t rock the boat; don’t fix what isn’t broken.

And so, if you’ve seen last year’s Galaxy S8 from Samsung, you’ve seen this year’s Galaxy S9. Content with the design and appearance of the S8, Samsung focused its efforts on small, mostly unseen changes that result in a better overall experience, but not a dramatically different one. Of course, Samsung being Samsung, there are a bunch of new gimmicky features crammed into it so there’s something to show on commercials.

That isn’t to say the Galaxy S9 and the larger S9 Plus are bad phones; the S8 was an excellent phone last year, and the S9 builds on that. If you’re planning to buy a new phone in 2018 and are willing to spend between $700 and $900 (the unlocked S9 sells for $719.99, while the S9 Plus goes for $839.99; carrier pricing varies), the S9 or S9 Plus will surely be one of the best options available. They will be the most popular Android smartphones released this year, without a doubt.

But three years on from Samsung’s big shift in design, we know what a premium Samsung phone is already. It’s predictable — both the good things (display, design) and the bad things (software). The Galaxy S9 is the most predictable Samsung phone yet.

The design, display, and specs of the S9 bring zero surprises, but they are the things that influence your day-to-day use of the phone more than anything else. For the most part, Samsung nailed the basics.

Though the overall design and appearance of the S9 pair are the same as the S8’s, it’s no less attractive or impressive to look at. Even hardened gadget bloggers, like Verge editor-in-chief Nilay Patel, were still impressed with the S9’s appearance when I first showed it to them. The phone has a seamless, infinity pool effect that, combined with its extra-tall aspect ratio display, makes it feel like you’re just holding a screen.

Samsung’s displays remain the best you can get on an Android phone

There is curved glass on both the front and back that makes the phone comfortable to hold and allows it to be narrower than other phones with similar size screens. Like last year, both the S9 and S9 Plus have curved screens; you can’t buy a flat version of either one. My complaint with the design is the same as any other glass-backed phone: it can be slippery to hold, is a horrible fingerprint magnet, and is less durable than a metal back would be.

But it certainly is pretty.

The displays in the S9 and S9 Plus are just as you’d expect them to be on a Samsung flagship, and they remain the best screens you can get on any Android phone. The S9 has a 5.8-inch screen, while the S9 Plus has a spacious 6.2-inch display. Both are high resolution, both are OLED panels with vibrant (sometimes too vibrant) colors, and both have great viewing angles. The screens are also slightly brighter this year, which is always appreciated on sunny days. The display’s extra-tall aspect ratio allows for minimal bezels above and below it, which aids the perception that you’re just holding a screen in your hand and nothing else.

But the S9’s top and bottom bezels are not as small or minimal as those on the iPhone X, its main competitor, or a number of other devices. In the time since Samsung made small bezels a table stakes feature, other companies have improved upon and iterated on the concept to produce even more immersive designs. Samsung is quick to tell you that the S9 doesn’t have a notch interrupting the screen, but it also doesn’t have the most immersive display anymore, either.

The S9 has Samsung’s other hardware standbys, too: fast wired and wireless charging, IP68 water resistance, and a 3.5mm headphone jack. If you’re looking for a high-end phone with a headphone jack in 2018, you have fewer choices than ever, so I’m quite happy to see that Samsung didn’t change this aspect of the phone.

Last year, Samsung debuted a dedicated button for its Bixby virtual assistant on the S8, and it’s in the same spot just below the volume buttons on the left side on the S9. You can now disable it from launching Bixby, which is progress, but Samsung still doesn’t provide a native way to reprogram it to something more useful. At its worst, it’s annoying, at its best, it’s a little fidget button that you can press without having to worry about it doing something.

So, what is actually new? Two things: the fingerprint scanner has been moved to a much easier-to-reach spot on the back of the phone, and the single speaker has been upgraded to a stereo pair.

The S8’s fingerprint scanner was a frustrating experience: it was small, hard to reach, and right next to the camera, which meant most of the time, I ended up with fingerprints on the camera lens. The S9’s scanner has been moved to just below the camera, which makes it much easier to reach, especially on the larger S9 Plus. It’s still small, especially compared to scanners on other phones, and it’s still too close to the camera. I’ve found myself frequently swiping on the camera lens when I try to use the gesture to open the notification tray.

In an obvious attempt to replicate Apple’s Face ID system, Samsung has introduced a new combination face-scanning / iris-scanning feature that can be used to unlock the phone instead of the fingerprint scanner. It will use either the more-secure iris scanner or the quicker-but-less-secure face scanner, depending on the lighting conditions you’re in. However, it’s slow, blinks an annoying red light when it activates the iris scanner, and never feels as seamless as Face ID. Good thing the fingerprint scanner is easier to use now.

Most of the Galaxy S9’s hardware features work very well, including its new stereo speakers

The new stereo speakers are more successful: they are louder, clearer, and more enjoyable to listen to than the S8’s single speaker. Samsung is playing catch-up here — many other phones have had stereo speakers for years now — but I’m glad to see (and hear) them finally on a Galaxy phone. They aren’t the best speakers I’ve heard on a phone, but they are more than good enough.

The rest of the S9’s improvements are under the hood: it’s running Qualcomm’s latest processor (in North America; other markets will see Samsung’s own Exynos processor), 4GB (S9) or 6GB (S9 Plus) of RAM, and a new LTE modem that supports even faster gigabit speeds. Those are specs we’re likely to see in almost every Android flagship this year, but Samsung is the first with them out of the gate.

Performance, at least during my review, has been great: the phone is snappy and responsive, with smooth scrolling and fast app launches. The network performance has also been just as impressive as the S8’s, and noticeably better than my experience with the iPhone.

The size of the battery and internal storage are unchanged: you get a 3,000mAh battery in the S9 and a 3,500mAh battery in the S9 Plus, with 64GB of storage and microSD card support in both. I’d really have liked to see Samsung increase the battery size this year. The battery life isn’t bad on these phones, but it’s merely average, and heavy users will deplete even the S9 Plus’ large battery after a long day.

The big new thing that Samsung wants everyone to know about is the S9’s new rear camera. The 12-megapixel image sensor is new and improved, with better image processing, but the major change is found in the lens, which can now physically switch between a very bright f/1.5 aperture and a smaller f/2.4 aperture, similar to how larger cameras work. The S9 Plus model gains a second camera for zooming and portrait mode effects, much like Samsung released with the Note 8 last year.

Samsung claims significant low-light improvements with the new camera, thanks to its new lens that can capture more light and improved signal processing to reduce image noise. In my experience, the S9 can certainly take great photos in low light, but they aren’t necessarily better than what Google’s Pixel 2 or even the iPhone X can capture most of the time. There’s less noise than images from the S8 and the colors are pleasing.

The S9’s images are improved over the S8, but still undeniably Samsung

But all of the images have a specific Samsung “look” to them, which is warmer, very saturated, and has imperfections (and sometimes detail) smoothed out. It’s quite different than what Apple’s or Google’s cameras produce and deciding between them often comes down to personal preference. On a technical level, all of the high-end phones available now can capture excellent photos. Chances are, if you weren’t a fan of Samsung’s image processing before, you still won’t like it now.

I’m less impressed with the switching aperture feature. It feels more like a parlor trick than anything else. The S9’s automatic mode will switch between the settings based on lighting conditions, but the pro mode lets you decide which aperture you want to use. Since the camera can just increase its shutter speed to compensate for more light, I don’t know why I’d ever use f/2.4 when an f/1.5 lens is available. I’d rather have a faster shutter speed or lower ISO setting than a slightly smaller aperture in virtually any situation.

The ability to switch apertures is enticing, and the principle is photographically sound. On a larger camera, controlling the aperture could result in sharper images or better exposure in bright conditions. It also allows for more creative control to produce long exposure effects or separate your subject from the background. But those assumptions about larger camera lenses don’t directly apply to the small lenses and sensors found on a phone.

Based on my testing, there isn’t an appreciable difference in sharpness between the two apertures. Since the small lens and sensor already have very deep depths of field, closing down the aperture on the S9 has a minimal effect on what’s in focus. Further, the amount of aperture control provided isn’t enough for advanced photography techniques, such as long-exposure shots during the day, so you still have to rely on add-on accessories for those.

The S9 Plus’ second telephoto lens is similarly gimmicky: Samsung’s Live Focus portrait mode isn’t as good as Apple or Google’s at separating a subject from the background, and in challenging lighting conditions, the image quality is rather bad. You should buy the S9 Plus over the S9 if you want a bigger screen or longer battery life, but not for its second camera lens.

The S9 can shoot 4K video at 60 frames per second, or 1080p slow-motion video at 240 frames per second, which catches it up with what the iPhone can do. (I expect all Android flagship phones to have these two video modes this year.) Both modes produce very nice quality video, but you have to make sure you have plenty of light for the slow-motion mode, or you’ll see a lot of image noise.

On the front camera, things are unchanged from last year. It’s the same 8-megapixel camera as the S8. It has autofocus, which no other front camera has yet to replicate, but its portrait mode and image quality aren’t as good as Google or Apple’s. By default, the selfie camera applies a lot of image smoothing and other effects to try to beautify the photo, but they just make it look out of focus and unattractive to me.

The S9’s design, performance, and cameras are all predictably good enough to keep it at the top of the smartphone pile for 2018. But, Samsung being Samsung, there are a ton of other things it is pushing with the S9 this year, and in my estimation, they all qualify as gimmicks. Unsurprisingly, the things that don’t work invariably involve software.

There are AR Emoji, Samsung’s take on the iPhone X’s Animoji feature. It scans your face and then produces a 3D Bitmoji-looking character based on 100 points of your face that kind of maybe sometimes looks like you. Then it takes this character and creates a bunch of reaction GIFs with it that you can send through the keyboard. There are also some weird-looking animals that you can create video clips with like you can do with Animoji.

The things that don’t work on the S9 unsurprisingly all involve software

There are a couple issues with Samsung’s AR Emoji. First, Samsung isn’t using any special tech to capture your face or movements, it’s just relying on the front or rear camera, so tracking is bad. Second, the characters it creates are on the wrong side of creepy, and everyone I’ve tested it with has been completely turned off with the results. The animal characters are similarly weird. It’s definitely something that Samsung built just to compete with Apple, and it’s not very good.

Next is the new Super Slow Motion mode in the camera. On top of the 240 frames per second slow-motion capture previously mentioned, the S9 can shoot up to 960 frames per second. That sounds really neat, but the S9 can only do it for 0.2 seconds at a time (which stretches to six seconds when played back) and at only 720p resolution. There are two ways to shoot this: you can manually try to trigger it to capture the 0.2 seconds of action you want, or you can use an automatic mode that looks for movement in a specific area of the frame and captures slow-mo when it detects it. Both are really hard to use and more frustrating than anything else: after 10 takes of trying to get a slow-motion shot of my six-year-old throwing a snowball, both her and my patience wore out and we gave up. Worse, the feature needs a ton of light to work, and even if you have that, image quality is still crappy.

Bixby isn’t new, but it’s still here, and it’s just as bad as it was when it launched last summer. It’s gotten a fresh coat of paint and it’s slightly faster than before, but it’s still way slower than Google Assistant and isn’t as good at parsing my voice commands. The virtual assistant has a couple of new features: there’s an integrated makeup store that lets you try makeup on virtually and then buy it directly from Sephora or Cover Girl, and a calorie detection feature that uses bad science to guesstimate how many calories are in the donut you’re about to eat. (Neither features is something I expect anyone will use more than once.) It’s fair to say that at this point, Bixby is a colossal failure as a smartphone assistant.

And then there’s the perennial complaint with Samsung’s software: why are there so many duplicate apps? The unlocked S9 I’ve been testing has two email apps, two gallery apps, two browsers, and two app stores. The carrier versions will surely have even more duplicative apps. A couple of Samsung’s apps are good — namely the Samsung browser and Samsung Pay — but the rest are inferior to the Google apps that are also installed on the phone, which just makes them annoying. If you care at all about software updates, Samsung is one of the worst manufacturers when it comes to delivering new versions of Android. As of this review, last year’s Galaxy S8 still doesn’t have Android 8.0 in the US, and that was released by Google over six months ago.

Without a new design or other new obvious advancements in technology to distract from Samsung’s usual problems, the software issues on the S9 become more obvious than they were with the S8. The upshot of most of this is that you can ignore Samsung’s marketing-focused gimmicks and really enjoy the Galaxy S9 (and none of them fall to the level of other Android manufacturers’ software problems). You can turn off Bixby, never bother to use AR Emoji or super slow motion, and disable most of Samsung’s apps. That leaves Samsung’s poor software update history as the big sticking point for a lot of people.

The Galaxy S9 is all of the good and all of the bad we’ve come to expect from Samsung

The rest of the S9 and S9 Plus is as great as we’ve come to expect. It has a head-turning design, fast performance, a great screen, and a very good camera. Outside of the display, the S9 isn’t a class leader in any category, but it’s good enough in all of them that the whole package makes for a great phone.

Owners of the S8 probably don’t need to upgrade this go-around — the differences aren’t great enough to warrant splurging on the S9 — but if you’re using a Galaxy S7 or any other phone from two years ago, the S9 is a significant step up in every respect.

Predictably, Samsung has made yet another excellent flagship phone. But, just as predictably, it still has plenty of room for improvement.

8.5 Verge Score Samsung Galaxy S9 Good Stuff Great design

Beautiful display

Fast performance

Capable camera

A headphone jack! Bad Stuff Average battery life

Gimmicks galore

Bixby still sucks

Samsung has a poor history of updating its phones Buy for $719.99 from Samsung Buy for $719.99 from Amazon

8.5 Verge Score Samsung Galaxy S9 Plus Good Stuff Great design

Beautiful display

Fast performance

Capable camera

A headphone jack! Bad Stuff Average battery life

Gimmicks galore

Bixby still sucks

Samsung has a poor history of updating its phones Buy for $839.99 from Samsung Buy for $839.99 from Amazon

====================================
9: 0.542291
https://www.techradar.com/newsSea of Thieves trailer, release date, news and featuresUpdate: While the open beta for Sea of Thieves is coming to an end this weekend, the pre-release hype is only just beginning. During the first episode of the new Microsoft show, Inside Xbox, it was announced that there's a special Sea of Thieves scavenger hunt about to begin in celebration of the game's release.

Anyone can take part in the hunt and it'll task players to crack up to 15 clues in order to find where X marks the spot. The winner or winners (because you may want to team up for this one) will receive a bunch of 4 golden bananas valued at £20,000 each.

The quest will begin on Monday, March 19 at 12 am PT / 8am GMT / 7pm AEDT when the first riddle will be revealed. It'll then run over a total of three days with the release of a total of 15 riddles.

On Wednesday March 21 at 1pm PT / 9pm GMT / 7am AEDT (Thursday, March 22) those taking part will have seven hours to input the answers to the riddles at xbox.com/thebananaquest. After this there'll be a final riddle to be solved by the top teams from each of the six participating countries (US, UK, Australia, Canada, Germany and France) and the winner will walk away with the prize.

It's definitely a different kind of pre-launch promotion but it seems to very much capture the spirit and aims of Sea of Thieves itself.

Scroll down to read everything we know about Sea of Thieves' confirmed features and check out our thoughts on the game's potential.

Article continues below...

It’s been a while since we’ve seen a game from Microsoft-owned, UK-based studio Rare that wasn’t Kinect-based. From 2009 to now, the studio has been tasked with Kinect Sports Rivals, a remake of ‘90s fighting game Killer Instinct and the Xbox avatars, but now they’re back to their old tricks with new tools, making the fantastic-looking open world MMO, Sea of Thieves.

In true Rare fashion the game features a charming art style that embraces the lighter side of the seven seas. This is not a game world that's in any sense dark and realistic, you can fire yourself out of canons to get around quickly, and you eat bananas to restore your health.

Read on for everything we know so far about Rare's pirate odyssey.

Cut to the chase

What is it? Rare's upcoming open-world Pirate odyssey

Rare's upcoming open-world Pirate odyssey When's it out? March 20 2018

March 20 2018 What can I play it on? Xbox One and PC

Sea of Thieves trailers

The latest trailer to be released from Rare studios gives good insight into the kinds of quests we'll see in Sea of Thieves and what individual player progression will involve in the long term. Much of the player progression system will involve building a reputation at NPC-run Trading Companies.

All of the trading companies will appeal to a different play style and each will offer their own quests for players and their crews to pursue. As your reputation builds with each trading company, the rewards you get from pursuing their quests will become more valuable but the quests themselves will also become more difficult.

If you and your crew are sitting at different reputation levels it will apparently still be possible to play quests together as Mike Chapman has promised "there are no barriers in place preventing players playing together."

At E3 2017 we were presented with another trailer for the game which shows off what we can expect the game to look like on the upcoming Xbox One X.

The trailer highlighted the game's signature Rare visuals and showed off a team of four as they sought to retrieve a chest of treasure to bring it back to their ship. The players explore islands where dangers appear in form of the ghosts of previous player who remain able to attack you, and you'll have to be especially careful while you're busy digging up your treasure, which takes a believably long amount of time.

You can check out the trailer below.

News and features

You can become a legendary pirate

The end-game for Sea of Thieves at the moment is to become a legendary pirate. By working hard to get through quests and increase your level, you'll increase your notoriety as a pirate. If you reach the ultimate, you'll become a legendary pirate with your very own ship, hideout, captaincy and outfit (it's up to you whether you wear it or not). You'll also have access to legendary pirate quests which you can choose to pursue on your own or share them with other players.

After you've achieved this status, Rare says there will be further progression added to the game and you'll be able to customize and enhance the ship you captain.

There will be no lootboxes, but there will be optional microtransactions

Rare has confirmed that in Sea of Thieves, there won't be any lootboxes or pay-to-win purchases. There will, however, still be items that you can purchase in-game. One of the first things you'll be able to buy, for example, is a pet.

When we asked executive producer Joe Neate about the game's microtransactions, he told us “everything is optional; it doesn’t affect power or progression, and you’ll know what you’re getting – ie. not loot boxes.”

Instead, his team is aiming to “add more fun and social things that benefit you if you buy [them], but also benefit your crew and lead to everyone having a stronger social experience.”

When we asked for examples of what kind of things we could expect to see in this category, we were told pets is likely to be first on the cards.

“The ability to buy a pet – a monkey or a cat to accompany you. But we want it to benefit everyone and we want it to be a part of the fun social side. So if you’ve got a monkey you'll be like ‘oh I’ll be able to pick it up and hold it!’ But that also means someone can run off with it. It’ll come back, obviously, but that bit of play between people and messing around is key.”

There will be more quests, items and timed events

The first major Sea of Thieves update will come after around three months, after the team has had the chance to listen to player feedback and react accordingly. After this, updates will range between small and large, with new item additions coming at a more regular pace than, say, large world changes.

During a studio visit to Rare we were told that there are plans to add new guilds on top of the three that are already in the world in order to allow for more diverse quests. There will also be new items and timed events. For example, you might find when you sign in one weekend that there's an NPC in a tavern for a couple of days with a quest that's never been available before and perhaps won't be available again.

It'll be this mix of big additions and temporary events that will encourage players to continue to log in and explore the Sea of Thieves.

No VR or local co-op planned

Though Sea of Thieves is a first-person game with an unobtrusive UI, there won't be a VR version. The reason for this, we've been told, is that sea sickness is very real, even in a virtual world. There also won't be any local co-op in the game. Rare told us that the game's cross-play and low minimum specs means that households with more than one laptop or a combination of laptops and consoles will be more than able to play the game together, without the need to split a screen.

There will be a Kraken

That's right, a Kraken. Sea of Thieves is a game that embraces the romantic and mythical side of piracy rather than the gritty realism of scurvy and keelhauling.

Naturally, that means a Kraken will appear in the game. It won't be possible to hunt down the Kraken, and there's predicting when it'll appear. Instead, Rare has said that it will be a sporadic and unpredictable force in the world to make things feel more organic and dynamic. It could appear to make wrangling a storm worse, or it could sneak up on your just as you're finishing a quest and trying to cash in your chests.

You can play solo or with a crew

Though Sea of Thieves is a game that not-so-gently encourages you to play with others, you can play alone on a small single-man ship. While you're playing solo, you can still come up against ships manned by crews of four and though they can be taken down, it's not easy. Playing solo requires some playstyle adaption and you might find yourself adopting more sneaky tactics (such as sneaking aboard a ship at night to plant explosive kegs) rather than sailing straight into broadside ship-to-ship combat. It's also a good opportunity to form a temporary truce with other single players to work together to take down a larger enemy.

When you're playing with others you have the option of creating a closed crew comprised of only your friends, or an open crew with strangers. No matter who you're working with, communication will be key.

About that communication

Sea of Thieves is heavily co-operative, although there are combative elements with other parties, too. You and your crew will have to figure out how to man a ship, with people taking over different jobs, which means that you'll have to communicate if you want to avoid accidentally doubling up on tasks.

At our hands on session at 2017's E3 conference we found out the dangers of this first hand. Our ship came under attack from enemy pirates, who promptly used their cannons to blow a hole in the hull of our ship. When this happens you'll need crew members to patch up the ship using timber, and others will need to use buckets to get rid of the water flooding the hull.

Fail to communicate and you'll find everyone switches to dealing with the biggest problem, which lead to our cannons being completely unmanned while everyone ran around with buckets filled with sea water.

What's interesting about Sea of Thieves is how minimal the UI is. The quests were listed on a piece of parchment that our character held, and looked at, within the game's world, and when we picked a quest the game relied on us literally telling our teammates what were were doing rather than having an immersion-breaking arrow appearing in the environment.

Then, when you get to the island with the treasure on it, you'll need to read your map alongside your compass to work out where you are since the game gives you no clues as to your location on the map itself.

This meant our team had enormous difficulty finding the treasure, and eventually we were forced to leave the island empty-handed and in serious need of some rum.

You have the option to communicate using your microphone or in-game voiceless commands – both work well. If you're looking for an open crew, Sea of Thieves will attempt to match you with players using the same communication method as yourself to make things easier.

Progression doesn't determine which quests you can do

When playing the game, you'll be able to do quests for three guilds. Which guild you choose determines the nature of the quest: Gold Hoarders will have you hunting treasure, the Merchants Guild will ask you to fetch and return items, while the Order of Souls are more combative bounty hunter missions. You're not locked into any particular guild, but you will get progression points for each one.

These will allow you to level up in the game, unlock higher level quests with better rewards and get closer to becoming a legendary pirate. That said, when you're a lower level pirate you'll still be able to take part in higher level quests. Rare has said that there's no level barrier in Sea of Thieves and as long as higher level players are willing to share their quests, there's nothing stopping new or less committed players taking part and earning their share.

Naval combat is present

Naval combat is another key element of the game, and in these instances your canons are your best friends. Your team will need to work together to get the cannonballs from beneath the deck into the canons themselves, after which point you'll be able to fire them at enemy ships to try and send them down to Davy Jones' Locker.

If you prefer a hands on approach you can board enemy ships to take on their crew using a combination of swords, muskets, and flintlock pistols. You can either swim aboard other ships, or, if you're feeling brave, you can literally fire yourself out of a canon to get there quicker.

You can customize your avatar

Though you'll select your avatar from a pre-made lineup, it will be customisable with the ability to change gender, physique, appearance, and outfits, although the game does not have skill trees or character classes. You’ll be able to further customize your character as you play with new, fancier outfits and even prosthesis.

The world is open and explorable

Sea of Thieves is not a multiplayer game with matches – this is an open world and every ship you come across will be crewed by real players. It's up to them and you whether they're friend or foe. Between quests there will be plenty of opportunities for bonding with your crew and sailing freely.

Dying is...interesting



And what if you die? Well, in true pirate fashion you’ll be booted to Davy Jones’ Locker, where you can swap stories with fellow ghosts and attempt to board a ferry back to the world of the living by performing quests for the ferryman. Your sunken ship can be plundered in the meantime, so don’t take too long.

How can I play it?

Sea of Thieves will be available on PC and Xbox One on March 20 2018. It'll be possible to purchase the game outright, or pick up an Xbox Game Pass subscription as the game is included in its entirety through the service.

If you're not sure whether Sea of Thieves is for you, picking up a Game Pass trial for free and playing the game for a short time through it is a good way to find out.

The game is not a port for PC or Xbox, it works equally on both and supports cross-play. While the console version has locked frame rates of 30fps, the PC version's are unlocked. Mouse, keyboard and controllers are all supported across console and PC.

====================================
10: 0.538618
https://www.usatoday.com/tech/Greek soccer game abandoned after 'armed' owner protests decisionPAOK owner Ivan Savvidis approaches AEK Athens' Vassilis Dimitriadis (center) as his bodyguard and players try to stop him. (Photo: Uncredited, AP)

ATHENS, Greece (AP) — A disputed goal at the end of a Greek league match on Sunday between leader AEK and title rival PAOK led to a pitch invasion by one of the team owners, who appeared to be carrying a gun.

Fernando Varela scored in the 90th minute, putting host PAOK ahead 1-0 in the northern city of Thessaloniki. The referee signaled a goal but then seemed to disallow it for offside.

PAOK's owner, businessman Ivan Savvidis, came on the field twice and was accompanied by bodyguards. On the second occasion, without the overcoat he was wearing before, Savvidis appeared to be carrying a pistol which was in its holder. Savvidis made no move to use the weapon at any time.

AEK officials claimed Savvidis threatened the referee during his first foray onto the pitch, before being pulled away. They claim he also threatened AEK's operations manager, Vassilis Dimitriadis. AEK said it will file a complaint with FIFA and UEFA, the world and European soccer governing bodies.

PAOK said in a statement: "After what happened today, PAOK chairman Ivan Savvidis is preparing all necessary procedures to protect the team and all his collaborators from the threats and attacks they have been subjected to. There will be relevant announcements on the issue soon."

The game was finally abandoned after more than two hours and the stadium emptied of fans. Adding to the widespread confusion, there were claims that the referee, Giorgos Kominis, had actually allowed the goal. The score at the time of abandonment remains uncertain — 0-0 or 1-0 to PAOK — with the referee's report still to come.

MORE SOCCER:

AEK claimed that the atmosphere had become too threatening for the game to resume, while the referee was reportedly in favor of resuming.

Earlier, AEK coach Manolo Jimenez had been sent to the stands, in the 83rd minute, for constantly complaining.

PAOK's previous home game — against another title rival, Olympiakos — never started after Olympiakos coach Oscar Garcia was hit in the face by a cash register paper roll.

The latest incident has thrown the outcome of the season into further disarray.

"Images of team owners invading the pitch armed are setting back soccer for years," Deputy Culture Minister for Sports Giorgos Vasileiadis said in a statement after the game. After claiming that the current season was the "cleanest and most exciting" because of the government's attempt to clean up the game, Vasileiadis said "we will not allow anyone to divert us from our task, even if we have to, in consultation with UEFA, to take difficult decisions." That has been widely interpreted as a threat to suspend the entire league.

After the non-starter against Olympiakos, PAOK was fined and deducted three points, the game was declared a 3-0 victory for Olympiakos and PAOK was due to have played its next two home games in front of empty stands. But an appeals panel decided early Sunday morning to void the points deduction and to allow PAOK to play inside a full stadium, although the result remained in Olympiakos' favor.

PAOK says it will appeal again, demanding that the game with Olympiakos takes place.

Olympiakos itself is appealing a decision that had deducted three points from the team for fan behavior in a Feb. 4 home game against AEK, which it lost 2-1. The appeal hearing has been delayed at least twice, and the current Greek league standings do not reflect any of the current sanctions.

If a PAOK official is judged to have threatened the referee as well as the AEK official, the team could potentially face relegation.

In soccer games which finished Sunday, Olympiakos won 4-0 at last-place Platanias, Xanthi beat Panetolikos 1-0 and Levadiakos drew 1-1 at Lamia.

Copyright 2018 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

====================================
11: 0.533278
https://www.technewsworld.com/Silicon Valley's Corrupt Underbelly: It's Far Worse Than We Thought

Jamf Now is a device management solution for the iPad, iPhone and Mac devices at work. We make management tasks simple and affordable, so you can support your users; no IT required. Create your free account!

After addressing the topic of sexual harassment and misconduct in Silicon Valley last month, I finally got my hands on a copy of Brotopia, an eye-opening new book, and a lot of executives should be happy I did not pursue my career in law enforcement. Otherwise I would be working my butt off to get them off the streets behind bars.

Everyone connected to tech -- especially investors, employees or customers of tech firms -- should read this book. Specifically, for investors, it will give you insights into a level of extreme avoidable risk that has not been factored into the market -- at least not yet.

If I were interested in developing a strategy either to ensure a Republican win in the mid-term elections or to move the center of tech to China, India, South Korea or Israel, this book would be invaluable.

That's because it highlights how easily most of the men and some of the women in the book could be blackmailed (given the nature of China, North Korea and Russia, perhaps that's already happening to some of them). That could be one of the reasons Russia's fake news effort was so successful during the last election, and why its expected larger effort in the coming elections once again could succeed.

My perspective is not so much to analyze the book as it is to talk about the foundational elements and potentially devastating impact of the problems associated with power abuse at scale, combined with a power shift between men and women that these abuses have accelerated.

My product of the week is Brotopia, but rather than ending with comments on the book, I'll use my reaction to it as the foundation of my analysis.

I really want you folks to read the book, so this is more of a teaser than anything else. In its pages, you will a find story, which is not presented as uncommon, of an employee watching her boss orally and anally engaged with two partners. You will read about job interviews (with women) in strip clubs and how sex is being exchanged for deals at a massive scale. You'll learn that the cheapest good lunch in San Francisco is in a strip club with benefits, regularly patronized by employees from zero tolerance companies.

You'll read about justifications for sordid behavior that mostly comes down to "I have the power, so the rules don't matter." You also will find that even though men drive these things, some women have been turning them to their advantage.

The book is one of the best-referenced books I have ever read. It is an easy read, but you will find it deeply upsetting (assuming you are human), and it might motivate you to act. It is, however, light on what we should do about the problems, which is why that is my focus.

Read the book. It could save your job, protect your mental health (particularly if you avoid becoming a victim), and give you ideas about how to protect not only yourself but also the important women in your life.

Analyzing the Problem

Analysts look, or should look, at problems differently from others. When we are doing the job correctly, we are expected to ignore the outcomes of a problem and focus instead on the causes and dependencies, in order to estimate collateral damage from both the problem and any fix. The more senior of us are expected to come up with a viable solution. By "viable," I mean something that is within the realm of possibility to execute.

Taking this objective view isn't always easy. In this case, I found it hard to put aside my growing anger while ready Brotopia and found it increasingly hard to think of the perpetrators of the described abuses as anything but demons.

The likely reactions of those who learn about abuses is itself a problem. I personally have good impulse control, but last week's shooting in Florida is a reminder that others don't. I expect that if I were to find that my sister, nieces or wife had been abused in some of the ways this book spells out, my restraint might not be adequate. Consider this recent Olympics-connected incident. I doubt there are many fathers who wouldn't do the same, though likely not in court.

Identifying the Causes

I'd place the primary causes of this bad behavior into four areas.

First, the perpetrators are people who had little power and an excessive focus on sex early in life. These people then accumulated power, some of them massive amounts, that they were neither prepared for or trained to wield.

Second, human resources organizations, which initially were created as a barrier to unions (as alternative advocates for employees), have evolved into weak compliance organizations. The result is that they are far better at covering up problems like this than they are at mitigating them. In fact, I'd argue that many have become enablers for abuse and harassment in large companies. VCs, where a significant amount of these abuses have been occurring, typically don't have HR.

Third, unions don't exist in the tech market, and women are not yet organized to respond to this threat collectively. This is like the way it was before the birth of unions, a time when male workers also were treated as cheap disposable assets.

Fourth, women have not yet realized or capitalized on the power they have. They often have flawed champions (politicians, attorneys, etc.) whose true motivations are questionable, and many continue to allow men to make critical decisions for them -- for example, right to life vs. choice. Women have more buying and voting power than men do, and they could use it for devastating effect if they chose to. I expect we are closing in on either a trigger event or the identification of a trigger event.

Dependencies/Collateral Damage

The activities described in this book have been embraced by some of the most powerful individuals in the world. They are people who work at Tesla, SpaceX, Google, and a broad cross-section of the VCs. Other major power players are connected to this bad behavior in many ways.

An uncontrolled purge, kind of what has been happening in the entertainment industry, could be devastating to the technology industry -- and particularly, Silicon Valley.

That collapse would shift billions of investments in technology out of Silicon Valley, California and the U.S., with a devastating impact on local, state and federal tax revenues. It would allow hostile governments with poor human rights reputations to point to the U.S. as their equal.

Shifts in customers -- particularly government and major brand shifts away from the identified firms -- would be massive. I'd place Oracle, given its model and culture, as the most at risk, followed by Google and Facebook.

Google once was linked tightly to President Obama, making it an ideal political target. Facebook's risk is greater proximity to the Russian election-tampering probe and the other bad players, rather than any identified bad behavior by its people.

Both Google and Facebook already have been called out as likely targets by the incoming FTC chair, making them ideal examples for attack.

What this means is that if corrective action were taken in an uncontrolled fashion, the collateral damage in terms of jobs, income and California/U.S. revenues would be catastrophic.

My Recommendations

HR and internal audit in firms, both in the tech industry and buying from it, need to be staffed up and missioned both to mitigate or eliminate the behavior and to protect the firm's assets. This means that executives, board members and employees who actively have been taking part in abusing women employees and customers need to be identified and terminated for cause.

In addition, buying agents who are cutting deals in exchange for sex or any other bribe need to be identified, the contracts reviewed, vendor penalties assessed, and either/or both terminated and charged criminally for their behavior. Anti-drug polices, fraternization policies and enforcement methods need to be reviewed and strengthened as needed.

Crisis teams need to be ramped up, prepared for the related required disclosures, and funded to deal with the coming image and brand damage at scale. This is not just for the tech companies, because vendors and customers that have major recognized brands will be dragged into the resulting press crapstorm through employees involved with any of sex parties or sex for business sales efforts.

I also would expect hosts of revealing pictures (cellphones are common and 360-degree cameras growing) to drive the entry of major legal players, like Gloria Allred, targeting where the pockets are deep and legal defense is light. VCs would be the easiest targets, but a major brand like Apple, Google or Facebook also would be very attractive.

Boards must get it on the record that executives have been questioned about this behavior and reminded that it would result in immediate termination. They must terminate the executives who have indulged in it. Recall that a considerably smaller incident critically damaged HP.

Women either should exit the industry or formally organize. However, this should be done in a measured fashion, and the effort -- for lack of a better term, "union of women" -- should be led by a qualified person who wouldn't use it as a stepping stone to becoming U.S. president (because that would introduce conflicts). I'd recommend starting with this as a foundational model.

As a side note, that may make the woman leading this the best actual candidate, because she could use that position to fix the problem. (I believe it is better to have a politician who is using the job to fix a problem like this, over one who is using the problem to get the job.)

Wrapping Up: Peter Thiel - Sodom and Gomorrah

As I was writing this, thanks to Peter Thiel's announcement, one other recommendation came up. I am far from religious, but when reading the book, the story of Sodom and Gomorrah came to mind. In that story, Lot got out and because he did not look back, he survived.

I think Peter Thiel's decision to move out of Silicon Valley puts him in the role of Lot, suggesting that the final recommendation is to get your headquarters and brand out of Silicon Valley before this all blows up.

While it may be an explosion seemingly in slow motion at the moment (the book highlights an impressive number of past terminations), all it will take is an underage girl claiming rape against a high-profile executive, an abused woman's spouse/father/son going postal on her abuser, or a death to cover up a rape, to trigger a catastrophic outcome for Silicon Valley and everyone in it.

Every sex party and incident of abuse is effectively Russian Roulette -- and based on the book, that gun is attempting to fire far more than once a day.

One final thought: Even if you take the abuse and illegal drugs out of this, the level of absolute stupidity behind this abusive behavior is unprecedented. Do you really want your money, your firm's future, and your brand connected to this lack of brain power?

Would you rather, when this goes, talk about how you anticipated and addressed the problem, or look like an idiot for not seeing it going on seemingly in front of your face? This could blow this week or next decade, but when it finally goes, it likely will go big.

My mother died so that I could live. Other women raised me -- they cared for me when I could not care for myself. I wouldn't be where I am if it weren't for my wife, and I could do no less than stand with women on this. To others of my sex, we too need to stand up and be counted.

This abusive behavior must end.

Rob Enderle has been an ECT News Network columnist since 2003. His areas of interest include AI, autonomous driving, drones, personal technology, emerging technology, regulation, litigation, M&E, and technology in politics. He has undergrad degrees in merchandising and manpower management, and an MBA in human resources, marketing and computer science. He is also a certified management accountant. Enderle currently is president and principal analyst of the Enderle Group, a consultancy that serves the technology industry. He formerly served as a senior research fellow at Giga Information Group and Forrester. Email Rob.



====================================
12: 0.533093
https://www.theverge.com/techThis iPhone case turns your phone into a working Game BoyAnother Game Boy case for your phone has popped up on the market, this time from Wanle Cases. The slim case, which snaps onto the back of an iPhone 6, 6S, 6 Plus, 7, 7 Plus, 8, 8 Plus, or X, comes loaded with 10 games and has the familiar Game Boy controls layout.

Wanle’s case taps into a certain nostalgia, built with an old-school screen and pre-loaded with retro titles like Tetris, Tank, Formula One Racing, and Snake and Block. It’s unclear from the company’s website if you’re limited to the games that come with the case, but hey, 10 games should be enough to waste away some time. This is markedly different from the Smart Boy phone “case” that made the rounds in 2015, which was really more of a dock you had to place your phone into.

What’s attractive about Wanle’s design is that it’s unobtrusive. Not only does it not interfere with using your phone as normal, but it’s also made with full port access for your phone’s buttons, microphone, speaker, headphone jack, dock, and flash. It’s worth noting that several reviews on Wanle’s site note minor issues, like the quality of the materials used, and the buttons sometimes not working as they should. Overall, though, it seems it does work as intended and people do note they love using it even with these tiny gripes.

To use the case, just slide a small battery into the inside corner, snap it on as you would any other sort of regular phone case, and it’s immediately good to go. Wanle touts that the plastic and slightly raised buttons make it practical as well, protecting your phone against inevitable falls and bumps. As nifty as it is to have a case that actually does something fun, it also makes me anxious about the possibility of having double the number of screens to potentially crack and scratch.

The case is available right now in both black and white options for a discounted price of $24.95. The company’s website says the regular retail price is $79.95.

====================================
13: 0.533093
https://www.theverge.com/techThis iPhone case turns your phone into a working Game BoyAnother Game Boy case for your phone has popped up on the market, this time from Wanle Cases. The slim case, which snaps onto the back of an iPhone 6, 6S, 6 Plus, 7, 7 Plus, 8, 8 Plus, or X, comes loaded with 10 games and has the familiar Game Boy controls layout.

Wanle’s case taps into a certain nostalgia, built with an old-school screen and pre-loaded with retro titles like Tetris, Tank, Formula One Racing, and Snake and Block. It’s unclear from the company’s website if you’re limited to the games that come with the case, but hey, 10 games should be enough to waste away some time. This is markedly different from the Smart Boy phone “case” that made the rounds in 2015, which was really more of a dock you had to place your phone into.

What’s attractive about Wanle’s design is that it’s unobtrusive. Not only does it not interfere with using your phone as normal, but it’s also made with full port access for your phone’s buttons, microphone, speaker, headphone jack, dock, and flash. It’s worth noting that several reviews on Wanle’s site note minor issues, like the quality of the materials used, and the buttons sometimes not working as they should. Overall, though, it seems it does work as intended and people do note they love using it even with these tiny gripes.

To use the case, just slide a small battery into the inside corner, snap it on as you would any other sort of regular phone case, and it’s immediately good to go. Wanle touts that the plastic and slightly raised buttons make it practical as well, protecting your phone against inevitable falls and bumps. As nifty as it is to have a case that actually does something fun, it also makes me anxious about the possibility of having double the number of screens to potentially crack and scratch.

The case is available right now in both black and white options for a discounted price of $24.95. The company’s website says the regular retail price is $79.95.

====================================
14: 0.528708
https://www.cnet.com/news/3 things we learned from Galaxy S9 teardownThe Galaxy S9 is finally here, and it's time to take a look at what makes Samsung's new flagship handset tick.

The phone features a sexy dual-curved design and a terrific camera for well-lit shots. But low-light images often look blurry and lack the fine texture and contrast of competing phone cameras. So what gives?

Thankfully, our friend tech repair site iFixit has posted its extensive Galaxy S9 teardown, as it does for many a new gadget upon release. Here's what we just learned from Samsung's flagship laid bare.

iFixit

First let's get to that industry-first dual aperture lens that Samsung put in both Galaxy S9 and S9 Plus phones. While standard camera lenses use at least five aperture blades, the S9 uses just two rotating, ring-like blades for its single auto-adjust for low light, which might explain the sometimes blurry photos.

iFixit

The S9 sports 3D avatars and new face unlock tools meant to match similar features in the iPhone X, but they fall short of the mark. The reason may lie in the S9's biometric hardware. iFixit found the handset's iris scanner, front-facing camera, IR emitter and proximity sensor are "pretty much exactly" what was found in last year's Galaxy S8.

iFixit

The Galaxy S9 delivers strong battery life, but that's not so new either. In a bit of déjà vu, iFixit found the battery to be a 3.85V, 3500mAh unit weighing in at 13.48Wh. If that sounds familiar, it's because those are same specs of the battery found in the Galaxy S8 Plus last year. Also, iFixit found that while replacing the S9's battery is technically possible, accessing it's a bit of a challenge.

My CNET colleague Jessica Dolcourt calls the Samsung S9 a good upgrade from older Androids, but says S8 owners can skip it.

Blockchain Decoded: CNET looks at the tech powering bitcoin -- and soon, too, a myriad services that will change your life.

'Alexa, be more human': Inside Amazon's effort to make its voice assistant smarter, chattier and more like you.

====================================
15: 0.524172
https://www.cnet.com/news/CNET Asks: What's your favorite thing about the Galaxy S9?Samsung made real waves with its new flagship phone at MWC 2018. There's so much to love when it comes to the Galaxy S9. From performance to design, let's take a look at some of its new features.

Let's start with the battery. The S9 has a full day's worth of battery life and if that's not enough, it can recharge really quickly: Charging from empty to full takes less than 2 hours. The S9 has a few key design upgrades from the S8, with a new finger-scanner position and brighter screen. Plus it's available in new colors: blue and purple.

The S9 has some hot new features as well, including super-slow-motion video recording and AR Emoji (similarly to Apple's animojis). You can read CNET's full Galaxy S9 review here.

Now we want to know your thoughts. Why are you excited for the release of the Galaxy S9, and which feature is your favorite? Let us know in the poll below.

Did we forget to include a feature? Don't be shy, let us know in the comments.

====================================
16: 0.522725
https://www.technewsworld.com/Russians Pose as Americans to Steal Data on Social Media

Jamf Now is a device management solution for the iPad, iPhone and Mac devices at work. We make management tasks simple and affordable, so you can support your users; no IT required. Create your free account!

Americans were targeted on social media by Russian agents on a mission to harvest personal information, The Wall Street Journal reported Wednesday.

The agents pretended to work for organizations promoting African-American businesses as a ruse to obtain personal information from black business owners during the 2016 presidential election campaign, according to the report.

Using names like "BlackMattersUS" and "Black4Black," the agents set up hundreds of accounts on Facebook and Instagram, the WSJ said.

As part of its efforts to address the abuse of its platform during the election, Facebook introduced a tool that would enable its members to determine if they had contact with Russian propaganda during that period. The tool doesn't address the problem of Kremlin agents masquerading as Americans, however.

Facebook did not respond to our request to comment for this story.

Defeating America Without Bullets

The Journal story came on the heels of President Donald Trump's Tuesday announcement that his administration was doing a "very, very deep" study of election meddling and would make "very strong" recommendations about the 2018 elections.

However, Adm. Michael Rogers, chief of the U.S. Cyber Command and head of the National Security Agency, last week told the Senate Armed Services Committee that the White House had not directed him to take any actions to counter potential Russian meddling in the 2018 elections.

"The impact of social media is very real," said Ajay K. Gupta, program chair for computer networks and cybersecurity at the University of Maryland.

"The lack of real attribution for social media content means that elections are being impacted by people who we don't know who they are," he told TechNewsWorld.

"Russians have said since the beginning of the Cold War they would be able to defeat America without firing a single bullet," Gupta added. "They couldn't do that as the U.S.S.R., but social media has given them another opportunity to try that."

Target of Opportunity

The latest revelation about Russian activity on social media during the elections lends credence to the idea that the Kremlin's goal is not to swing elections one way or another, but to weaken America's form of government.

One in four voters were considering staying away from the polls due to cybersecurity fears, according to a survey Carbon Black conducted last year, for example. If accurate, that could put the number who would not vote for that reason in the neighborhood of 55 million.

"This blended campaign of human intelligence and signals intelligence is dangerous for democracy," said Tom Kellermann, chief cybersecurity officer at Carbon Black.

Russia is into the long game, noted Tellagraff CEO Mark Graff.

"Hillary Clinton was a target of opportunity for the Russians in the 2016 election," he told TechNewsWorld.

"Their strategic goal was not to elect Donald Trump. The strategic goal was to disrupt American society, undermine our feelings of unity, undermine our faith in democracy," Graff maintained. "They've been trying to do that for over 50 years -- and now what they can do, using social media, is do it from the comfort of government buildings inside Russia."

What's a Social Network to Do?

Both Twitter and Facebook have made efforts to counter nation-state backed exploitation of their platforms, but the consensus is that more can be done.

"They must dynamically verify the identities of their users and filter illicit and inflammatory content," Carbon Black's Kellermann told TechNewsWorld.

"Facebook and Twitter are seemingly just learning how to combat this, and they both appear to be very late to the game," observed Brian Martin, director of vulnerability intelligence at Risk Based Security.

The social networks could deploy a number of measures, he told TechNewsWorld, ranging from monitoring the IP addresses of suspect accounts to refining their analyses of the language in posts, looking for key indicators of actors who don't speak English as their first language.

Users should have the option to flag suspected bots, so the social media companies could investigate and weed out bad actors, said Sherban Naum, senior vice president for corporate strategy and technology at Bromium.

Better Authentication

Credible news outlets should be given some kind of distinctive authentication, Naum also recommended.

Social media companies have certain "verified" users, but that appears to be inadequate. "Lots of bad guys are verified," he told TechNewsWorld.

"Twitter and Facebook could also publish trending information about bots and bad information so users can see what's trending that is legit and what's trending that is junk," Naum suggested.

What can consumers do to protect themselves?

Users should "approach social media with the same skepticism that they should be approaching email and scams," Risk Based Security's Martin advised.

"Someone offering you 100 million dollars is suspect, of course," he said.

"Someone that seems to have a 'magic bullet' showing a political figure is the next devil? Think about it more critically than you might otherwise," Martin cautioned. "Does the post have any evidence to back it up? Or is it just a compelling picture, that may have been doctored, and a catchy one-liner that invokes emotional responses?"

John P. Mello Jr. has been an ECT News Network reporter since 2003. His areas of focus include cybersecurity, IT issues, privacy, e-commerce, social media, artificial intelligence, big data and consumer electronics. He has written and edited for numerous publications, including the Boston Business Journal, the Boston Phoenix, Megapixel.Net and Government Security News. Email John.



====================================
17: 0.514808
https://www.telegraph.co.uk/technology/news/Samsung Galaxy S9: Release date, specs, colours, price and all you need to knowSamsung has revealed its latest flagship smartphone: the Samsung Galaxy S9. The new phone follows its highly successful Galaxy S8 and could set the bar for Android smartphones for the year to come.

The new phone features Samsung's now ubiquitous edge-to-edge display, AR emoji, a powerful camera and stylish super-slow motion video. Samsung has said the smartphone will "reinvent the camera", putting high-spec camera technology front and centre of the new handset.

The Samsung Galaxy S9 will lay down a challenge to Apple's premium iPhone X. It is slightly cheaper at £739, but comes with plenty of premium specs to make it a major rival to the current Apple line up.

For a full review of the Samsung Galaxy S9 click here, for everything else you need to know, read on:

Samsung Galaxy S9 release date and price

The Samsung Galaxy S9 will be released on Friday, 16 March, with pre-orders starting on 1 March. It was announced on 25 February at Mobile World Congress in Barcelona.

The Galaxy S9 will be priced at £739, while the larger S9+ will be priced at £869. This is close to £50 more for each model than the last generation.